# Extracted: Network 1.pdf (22 pages)


---PAGE 1---
Course Learning Outcomes
An overview of what you'll learn and the structure of this course.
We'll cover the following
• Welcome to the Course
• What Will I Be Able to Do by the End of the Course?
• The Components
• An Introduction to the Basics
• The Layered Architecture
• Socket Programming Basics
Welcome to the Course #
Welcome to Network Fundamentals! In this course, you’ll get an in-depth
overview of the key concepts of computer networks. Here are a few key
components that will help you get the most out of this course!
What Will I Be Able to Do by the End of the
Course? #
Develop socket programs in Python.
Trace networks metadata through the command line.
Learn about tools that help debug network problems.
Understand how applications such as browsers and mobile apps work
from the perspective of the network.
View and understand browser interactions with websites.
The Components #
An Introduction to the Basics #
The course starts off by introducing some key concepts and networks lingo
h
ill b
d h
h
h
f h
that will be used throughout the rest of the course.
The Layered Architecture #
Computer networks are organized into conceptual layers. This makes learning
concepts easier and is a standard teaching method in most books and courses.
You will learn about each layer in a separate chapter. Each chapter will start
off by laying down the theoretical foundations and then will give some handson experience with bash shell  or python  playgrounds that you can run
commands in.
Socket Programming Basics #
A chapter of this course teaches python socket programming through basic
server and client programs in python. It builds up to the programs line-byline; each line is explained in detail before the next one is added on.
Let’s dive right in!
Learning Instruments
Here's a short summary of some tools used throughout this course to maximize your
learning.
We'll cover the following
• Coding Widgets
• Fun Facts
• Notes
• Security Warnings
• Quotes
• Graphics
• Quizzes
• Links
Coding Widgets #
The course demonstrates the usage of some key command-line network
tools. These will help you immensely in your career regardless of what area
of computer science you work in. Additionally, you’ll learn the essentials of
socket programming in Python.
Fun Facts #
🔎 Did You Know? This course is scattered with tidbits of information
that will make you feel more involved with the field! These aren’t
absolutely essential to learning the fundamentals of computer networks
so you can skip them if you want. But they definitely keep things
interesting.
Notes #
📝 Note This course is scattered with memos and ‘FYIs’ as well. These
notes are important to read and generally cannot be skipped.
Security Warnings #
☠ Security Warning: we’ll broach the topic of some potential
network security issues with the topics we’re discussing.
Quotes #
“Cool quotes from important people will be included in prompts such as
this one.” 
— The Author of This Course
Graphics #
We have several slides and drawings throughout this course that make
learning easier.
Quizzes #
Last but not least, you’ll be taking a fair amount of quizzes to help solidify
your knowledge!
Links #
We’ve given links to several external resources throughout this course if you
are interested in further reading. Most of them can be skipped.
Let’s begin!

---PAGE 2---
What is the Internet?
Let's start with the big question.
We'll cover the following
• But First, What’s a Network?
• The Internet: A Network of Networks
The Internet permeates our very existence. Most of us cannot imagine life
without it. We often depend on it for livelihoods, for routine commutes, and
for entertainment. It has become almost like a utility. You’re accessing this
course through the Internet.
But how does it actually work? What goes on behind the scenes? Well, you’ve
come to the right place to learn that! The Internet is a global network of
computer networks.
But First, What’s a Network? #
A network is officially defined as
a group or system of
interconnected people or items.
So, by this definition, train
stations connected to each other
with rail tracks make up a railway
network. People who follow each
other on Twitter make up an
online social network.
Similarly, computers connected to
each other with cable or wireless
radio make up a computer
network
A basic computer network
network.
Why Computer
Networks?
There are two main purposes of
computer networks:
Communication using computers
and sharing of resources. An
“internet” allows doing these two
things across different computer
networks.
📝 Note: internet vs. Internet An internet with a lowercase “i” is any
interconnection of computer networks. Whereas the global Internet is
always spelled with a capital I.
The Internet
The Internet is essentially a network of
computer networks.
So your personal computer is connected to
other computers at your house or workplace
to create a small computer network, which is
in turn connected to other computer
networks. And so the global Internet
encompasses a complex web of
interconnected computer networks.
This concept can be better visualized in the
illustration below:
A heat map of the usage of the internet
over a 24-hour period
The Internet: A Network of Networks #
Your Computer
The Internet: A Network of Networks
1 of 5
In the next lesson, we’ll take a look at a short history of the Internet and how
it all began.

---PAGE 3---
A Quick History of The Internet
Here's a short overview of how the Internet came to be.
We'll cover the following
• Why Learn History?
• The '50s: The Cold War
• The '60s-'70s: ARPANET
• The '80s: Protocols
• Search Engines
• The 21st Century: The Age of the Internet
• A Video
• Quick Quiz!
Why Learn History? #
Learn about the mistakes made during the development of the Internet
and avoid repeating them.
Understand why some things are designed and work the way they do
today.
Lastly, it’s interesting!
“Those who do not read history are doomed to repeat it.”
– George Santayana
Let’s get right into it.
The '50s: The Cold War #
The birth of the Internet can be
traced back to the middle of the
last century.
The U.S. was in the midst of a
cold war with The Soviet Union
and both nations were trying to
gain an advantage over the
other.
In 1957, the Soviets launched
Sputnik, the world’s first
satellite, propelling us into the
space age.
This caught the US off-guard, and
in response the U.S. government
created ARPA (Advanced
Research Projects Agency) which
was mandated with the
responsibility of the
technological and scientific
advancement of the country.
Replica of Sputnik I
The '60s-'70s: ARPANET #
ARPA was meant to facilitate research. But their computers could not
talk to each other.
ARPA sent out a request for the design of a network that would allow
computers across the entire country to talk to each other.
A network called the ARPANET was developed over the course of a year.
In September 1969, the ARPANET was turned on. The first four nodes
were at UCLA, Stanford, MIT, and the University of Utah. Over the '70s,
other computer networks just like ARPANET sprang up.
While the computers on one network could communicate via a default
way to communicate set by the network administrator of each network
way to communicate set by the network administrator of each network,
the computers on different networks could not communicate since every
network had its own language or - more formally – protocol, which we
will introduce in a later lesson.
Then, a standardized protocol called the Transmission Control Protocol
was invented (RFC 675).
It was also in RFC 675 that the term “Internet” was first used. Later RFCs
continued the use.
🔎 Did You Know? The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) is
now known as Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) to
emphasize the its focus on defense!
The '80s: Protocols #
ARPANET was fully migrated to TCP/IP.
As we moved into the 1980s, computers were added to the Internet at an
increasing rate. These computers were primarily from government,
academic, and research organizations. Much to the surprise of the
engineers, the early popularity of the Internet was driven by the use of
electronic mail.
The '90s: The World Wide
Web
During the 90’s, the researchers at the
European Council for Nuclear
Research (CERN) felt the need for
automated sharing of their findings
between their computers. CERN had
documents that cross-referenced other
documents. So, there were these
(hyper) links between documents.
In 1990 Tim Berners-Lee introduced his
Tim Berners Lee at CERN. Taken from:
https://www.~ickr.com/photos/itupictures/16662336315
under CC BY 2.0
World Wide Web project to store and
retrieve these inter-connected
documents.
Check out a restored version of the first
website ever!
Later, educational, commercial and so
many other applications were realized.
The World Wide Web got even more popular with the advent of browsers
such as Mosaic and Netscape which allowed combining graphics with
web navigation!
… Creating the web was really an act of desperation because the situation
without it was very difficult when I was working at CERN later. Most of the
technology involved in the web, like the hypertext, like the Internet, multi
font text objects, had all been designed already. I just had to put them
together. It was a step of generalizing, going to a higher level of
abstraction, thinking about all the documentation systems out there as
being possibly part of a larger imaginary documentation system." 
– Tim Berners Lee
Search Engines #
Another fun fact that initially, there were no search engines.
So how would you find a website? Well, you couldn’t. Either you knew it or
you didn’t. Of course, you could land on a website by accident or by following
a link from another website that you knew.
Then, people started creating static indices of the web - a categorized listing of
websites. People would sit and randomly click on links to find web pages and
add links to their index. But this couldn’t scale. So, eventually, search engines
were “invented.”

---PAGE 4---
Altavista and Yahoo! were among the earlier search engines. According to this
Wikipedia article, the first automated web index was World Wide Web
Wanderer. Soon afterward, the first web search engine, the W3Catalog was
invented.
The 21st Century: The Age of the Internet #
 
And now here we are. In an age in which all our devices run on the Internet,
even toasters for some – the era of the Internet of Things is here! Life without
it seems almost inconceivable.
A Video #
Here’s the history of the Internet in a short video.
ARPANET - The First Internet
ARPANET - The First Internet
Quick Quiz! #
1
Tim Berners Lee invented the Internet
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 7
A) True
B) False
Now that we have an overview of where the Internet comes from, let’s discuss
what it’s actually made of in the next lesson!
Internet Standards Documents
Let's look at what can be called the "of}cial documentation of the Internet" now! We'll
refer to these standards documents throughout this course.
We'll cover the following
• Why Care About Internet Standards?
• What Is an RFC?
• Who Writes RFCs?
• History
• Contents of an RFC
• Types of RFCs
• Standards Track
• Historic
• Unknown
• Quick Quiz!
Why Care About Internet Standards? #
Standardization has allowed us to achieve interoperability. Different
organizations and vendors can develop hardware and software to be
connected to the Internet. Unless they agree on a protocol, their hardware and
software wouldn’t be able to talk to each other. Standardization is all
interested stakeholders sitting together, debating and agreeing on a protocol
or design.
Also, it’s important to know what’s out there, who designed what and why.
Also, you’d know where to submit your ideas in case you come up with a
better design for any of the protocols we’re going to study.
What Is an RFC? #

---PAGE 5---
An RFC or Request For Comments is a document that contains proposals
for new protocols or systems.
Today, RFCs are submitted to and handled by the Internet Society which
has a sub-body called the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). This
sub-body works on the standardization of Internet protocols and systems.
An RFC is then deliberated on by experts, revised and then hopefully,
eventually adopted as a standard.
Who Writes RFCs? #
RFCs are generally written by those who work at IETF, Internet
researchers, and specialists. However, an RFC can be written by anyone!
Yes, even you can write one. Just write up your findings and submit them
to the Internet society’s Independent Submissions page!
All Internet protocols, like the world wide web, are described by one or
more RFCs.
History #
RFCs were started by Steve Crocker to document details of ARPANET
while it was being created. These documents were called Requests For
Comments to encourage discussion and not seem too assertive. They
used to be written on a typewriter and distributed around ARPA’s office
as physical copies with requests for comments.
Contents of an RFC #
RFC’s generally start off with a header that contains the category of the
document, its identification number, the name(s) of the author(s), and the
date.
Then the document contains its title, a status, and an abstract.
Then a table of contents after which the document starts.
The document usually starts with an introduction.
Here is an example of the first page RFC standards document, RFC 2046.
An example of the }rst page of an RFC
Types of RFCs #
Standards Track #
There are two kinds of standards documents: Proposed Standard, and
Internet Standard.
Proposed Standard documents are well reviewed and stable but not as mature
as an Internet Standard document. Internet Standard documents are
technically competent, practically applicable, and publicly recognized.
Perhaps one of the most important standard documents that we know about
from the Internet history lesson is the one on the Internet protocol, RFC 791.
IETF has documented its internet standards process in RFC 2026 Have a look
IETF has documented its internet standards process in RFC 2026. Have a look
if you want to learn more about it.
Historic #
These RFCs are usually obsolete and contain details about technologies that
are not in use anymore.
Unknown #
Some RFCs cannot be categorized or often do not specify any new standards
or findings. These are categorized as unknown.
You can browse all of these categories of RFCs on the RFC retrieve page.
Quick Quiz! #
1
Standardization enables ______
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) Interoperability
B) The best design practices to be followed
C) Optimization
Now that we have a solid foundation to start learning all about computer
networks, let’s get right into it from the next chapter!
Communication Over the Internet
Before we dive deeper into the course, let's study some key concepts to understand how
communication over the Internet works
We'll cover the following
• What Is a Protocol?
• An Analogy
• TCP
• UDP
• HTTP
• Packets
• Addressing
• IP Addresses
• Ports
• Quick Quiz!
What Is a Protocol? #
An Analogy #
Let’s start with an analogy. Think of your routine conversations. They usually
follow a general pattern dictated by predefined rules. For example, most
conversations start with greetings and end with goodbyes. They probably go
something like this:

---PAGE 6---
You: Hello
Friend: Hey!
...conversation ensues...
You: Bye!
Friend: Goodbye :)
Turns out that end systems also follow such protocols to communicate with
each other effectively on the network.
Formally, according to the Oxford Dictionary, a protocol is “a set of rules
governing the exchange or transmission of data between devices.” In the next
few chapters, we’ll study several network protocols in detail.
TCP #
The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is one such protocol. It was
created to allow end systems to communicate effectively. The distinguishing
feature of TCP is that it ensures that data reaches the intended destination and
is not corrupted along the way.
UDP #
The User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is also one such key protocol. However, it
does not ensure that data reaches the destination and that it remains
incorrupt.
HTTP #
HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) is a web protocol that defines the
format of messages to be exchanged between web clients, e.g., web browsers
and web servers and what action is to be taken in response to the message.
The World Wide Web uses this as its underlying protocol.
y
g p
Packets #
Now that we’ve established that end systems communicate with each other
based on set protocols, let’s discuss how they actually communicate.
Computers send messages to each other that are made up of ones and zeros
(bits).
However, instead of sending messages of possibly trillions of bits all in one go,
they’re broken down into smaller units called packets to make transmission
more manageable. These smaller sizes make transmission more manageable
because most links are shared by a few end-systems. Sending smaller units in
succession instead of one big file all in one go makes usage of the network
fairer amongst end-systems.
We’ll talk about the exact technical definition of a packet in a future chapter.
Addressing #
So, applications communicate with each other by sending messages based on
protocols. However, packets have to be addressed to a certain application on a
certain end system. How do you do that out of potentially millions of end
systems and hundreds of applications on each of them? The answer lies in
addressing.
An address identifies a sending entity and a receiving entity.
IP Addresses #
Every device that is connected to the Internet has an address called an ‘IP
Address’ which is much like a mailing address.
IP addresses are 32 bit numbers (in IP version 4).
The human readable way for looking at these numbers is the dotted
decimal notation, whereby the number is considered one octet of bits (8
bits) at a time. Those octets are read out in decimals, then separated by
dots.
Hence, each number can be from 0 to 255. For example, 1.2.3.4 .
Some IP addresses are reserved for specific functions. We’ll discuss them
in more depth in later lessons.
Check yours by running the following command on a shell on your local
setup.
curl ifconfig.me -s
All of the code on our platform is run on one of our servers, and the
output is returned and printed on your screen. Hence, the IP address
here belongs to an Educative server!
Ports #
Any host connected to the Internet could be running many network
applications. In order to distinguish these applications, all bound to the same
IP address, from one another, another form of addressing, known as port
numbers, is used. Each endpoint in a communication session is identified
with a unique IP address and port combination. This combination is also
known as a socket. So in essence, ports help to address the packet to specific
applications on hosts.
IP addresses identify end systems but ports identify an application on the
end system.
Every application has a 16-bit port number. So the port number could
range from 0 to 2
= 65535.
The ports 0 −1023 are reserved for specific applications and are called
well-known ports.
For instance, port 80 is reserved for HTTP traffic.
The ports 1024 −49152 are known as registered ports and they are
used by specific, potentially proprietary, applications that are known but
not system defined.
SQL server for example, uses port 1433
16
SQ
se
e
o e a
p e, uses po t
33
It is generally considered best practice not to use these ports for any
user defined applications although there is no technical restriction
on using them.
The ports 49152–65535 can be used by user applications or for other
purposes (dynamic port allocation for instance, but more on that later).
Here is a visual of these ports.
    
Well-known   
    
Registered   
    
Dynamic   
 0  
 
1,024  
 
49,152  
 
65,535 
Quick Quiz! #
1
Which of the following is a valid IP version 4 address?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 4
A) 3.-1.33.67
B) 3456.3.17.8
C) a.e0.55.2
D) 203.128.22.10

---PAGE 7---
In the next lesson, we’ll study some physical and hardware aspects of
computer networks.
The Edge of The Internet: End Systems
Here's an introduction to the important physical components of the Internet that make it
tick!
We'll cover the following
• End Systems
• The Network Edge
• Quick Quiz!
So far, we know that the Internet is a network of networks. Each network is
made up of devices, called end systems, connected to each other with
communication links. Let’s look at each in more detail.
End Systems #
End systems are devices that are connected to the Internet. They include:
Desktop computers
Servers
Mobile devices
IoT devices.
So, an end system can be anything from a rack server to an Internet-enabled
toaster. These devices are often also called edge systems in networking
jargon because they are technically situated at the ‘edge’ of the Internet since
they don’t relay data from one device to another.
The Network Edge #
The network edge is simply the collection of end-systems that we use every
day: smartphones, laptops, tablets, etc. However, note that devices that relay
messages (such as routers) are not part of the edge of the Internet.
Laptop
Desktop
Router
Wireless router
Desktop
Desktop
Server
Router
Tablet
= End System
= Intermediate networks that
connect shown networks
The end systems out of them -- they reside on the "edge of the network"
Note that the two networks shown could be connected through any number
of intermediate networks such as those for their Internet Service Providers.
Since the actual path doesn’t matter, we obfuscate the interconnectivity by
using the cloud symbol.
Quick Quiz! #
1
Which of the following is NOT an end system?
A) The mobile connection system
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
e
ob e co
ect o
syste
B) A digital door bell
C) A web server
D) A router
Now that we understand the basic structure of the Internet, let’s look into how
end systems access the Internet in the next lesson!

---PAGE 8---
What Are Access Networks?
Let's study how end systems access the Internet.
We'll cover the following
• Access Networks
• Transmission Rates
• Quick Quiz!
Access Networks #
Access networks, also known as the last mile, consist of the media through
which end systems connect to the Internet. In other words, access networks
are networks that physically connect end systems to the first router on a
path which connects them to some other end systems.
Laptop
Desktop
Router
Wireless router
Desktop
Desktop
Server
Router
Tablet
= Edge Device
= Intermediate networks that
connect shown networks
= Physical media part of the
access network
Access networks
Network Interface
Adapter
The network interface adapter enables a
computer to attach to a network. Since
there are so many different types of
networks, network adapters are used so
that the user can install one to suit the
network to which they want to attach.
Network interfaces also usually have an
address associated with them. One
hi
h
lti l
h
A network card. Taken from:
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Network_card.jpg#}lelinks
Notice the port that the cable would go into.
machine may have multiple such
interfaces.
These interfaces are essentially the
physical gateways that connect devices
to the Internet.
Most machines then have external ports which network cables can be plugged
into. The type of access network depends on the physical media involved.
Here are some common access networks:
1. Digital Subscriber Line (DSL)
2. Cable Internet
3. Fiber To The Home (FTTH)
4. Dial-Up
5. Satellite
6. WiFi
We’ll go through the what and how of most of these access network in the
next few lessons.
But first, how is the speed of a network measured? What exactly is the unit of
speed of a network? Let’s have a look!
Transmission Rates #
The rate at which data is transmitted from one point to another in a network
is called the transmission rate. In other words, the speed of the network is its
transmission rate.
The smallest unit that digital data can be divided into is a bit: a 1 or a 0.
Transmission rates are measured in units of bits/sec. However, since bits/sec
is a really small unit, multiples/prefixes are commonly used. Common
prefixes and their interpretation is given below:
1 kilobit/s = 1 kbps = 1000 bits/s = 10^3 bits/s
1 megabit/s = 1 mbps = 1000000 bits/s = 10^6 bits/s
1 gigabit/s = 1 gbps = 1000000000 bits/s = 10^9 bits/s
Common bit rates
For example, a speed of 240 Mbit/second means that 240, 000, 000 or 240
million bits get transmitted every second!
There are essentially two ways that data flows in a network: from an end
system or to an end system. The outgoing transmission rate is called the
upload rate, and the incoming transmission rate is called the download rate.
Some networks have varying upload and download transmission rates, called
asymmetric transmission rates. This is useful because traffic going out from
end hosts generally consists of small requests which solicit comparatively
much larger responses.
📝 Note You can check the upload and download transmission rate of
your Internet connection from https://www.speedtest.net!
Quick Quiz! #
1
What does ‘asymmetric transmission rate’ mean?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) The speed of the Internet varies at different times of day
B) The speed of the Internet remains the same throughout the
day
C) The upload speed and the download speed vary
D) The upload speed and the download speed are the same

---PAGE 9---
Now that we’ve covered the basics, let’s move on to some detail about the
physical media that actually make up these networks.
Types of Access Networks: DSL
There are a number of ways that your end system can access the Internet, let's look at
each in detail!
We'll cover the following
• Digital Subscriber Line: DSL
• Internet Service Providers
• How DSL Works
• Quick Quiz!
Now that we know what access networks are, let’s look at some common
types.
Digital Subscriber Line: DSL #
A Digital Subscriber Line or DSL uses the existing groundwork of telephone
lines for an Internet connection. DSL connections are generally provided by
the same company that provides local wired phone access.
Internet Service Providers #
An ISP is just the company that provides end users with an Internet
connection. For instance, AT&T and Verizon are ISPs. So the telephone
company or telco is the Internet Service Provider or ISP in the case of DSL!
How DSL Works #
A device on the home user’s end called a DSL modem modulates the
digital signals that a computer outputs into high-frequency analog audio
signals that are out of the human voice and hearing range.
The telephone wire’s frequency spectrum is divided into 3 parts:
1. A downstream channel (which is used to receive data), in the 50 kHz
to 1 MHz frequency range or ‘band’
to 1 MHz frequency range or band
2. An upstream channel (used to send data) which takes up the 4 kHz
to 50 kHz band
3. A regular channel used for telephone conversations taking up the 0
to 4kHz range
🔎 Did You Know? Modulation - demodulation is where the name
MoDem comes from.
For reference, the human hearing range goes from 20 Hz to 20 kHz and the
average human voice range goes from 85 Hz to 255 Hz.
0 Hz
1 MHz
Let's see how many frequencies are alotted to what channel
1 of 4
These signals are then carried by telephone wires over to the ISP
Then, these high-frequency analog signals are converted back to digital
signals using a device at the ISP’s end called a Digital Subscriber Line
Access Multiplexer (DSLAM).
The signals are then forwarded to the end system that it was meant to
reach
Here are slides that depict this process:
An end system
1 of 5
Due to the asymmetry between the width of the three channels, this type of
DSL is termed as Asymmetric DSL (ADSL). Symmetric DSL, on the other
hand, offers equal upstream and downstream bandwidth.
🔎 Did You Know? Steve Jobs and
Steve Wozniak, founders of Apple
Inc., built a Blue Box in the 1970s
that allowed them to make free
international telephone calls. It
worked by generating the same
audio frequencies into telephone
receivers that were generated by
operators to make long distance
calls essentially bypassing the
telephone company’s toll collection
Steve Wozniak (left) and Steve Jobs (right):
https://www.~ickr.com/photos/mac_}lko/4309049355

---PAGE 10---
system. With a little bit of
knowledge, they ended up rigging
an international infrastructure!
Quick Quiz! #
Q
What’s a DSLAM?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 1
A) A device that creates DSL signals
B) A device that ISPs use to decode audio signals into digital
signals
C) A device that end users use to encode audio signals into
digital signals
Now that we have an overview of DSL, let’s look at a few other common access
networks in the next lesson!
Types of Access Networks: Cable, FTTH, Dial-Up, and
Satellite
Let's discuss a few other common access networks.
We'll cover the following
• Cable Internet
• How It Works
• Slower During Peak Hours
• Hybrid Fiber Coax
• Transmission Rate
• Fiber To The Home: FTTH
• Transmission Rate
• Dial-Up
• Transmission Rate
• Satellite
• Transmission Rate
• Quick Quiz!
Cable Internet #
In the case of cable Internet, the TV cable company is the ISP and it relies
on the preexisting infrastructure of cable TV to grant Internet access.
It runs on coaxial cable. Coaxial cable has enough of a frequency range to
carry TV channels and a stream of upstream and downstream Internet.
How It Works #
In essence, cable Internet works very similarly to DSL.
A device on both the user’s end and the ISP’s end modulates the analog
signals to digital and vice versa.
Slower During Peak Hours #
However, cable Internet can be slower during peak hours, when a majority of
users are online at once. This is because cable Internet is a shared broadcast
medium: every signal that comes from the ISP is sent to every single home
regardless of which one it was meant for.
Hybrid Fiber Coax #
Usually, cable Internet works with a combination of coaxial cable and optic
fiber (which we’ll discuss in the next chapter), where the fiber connects
optical nodes that exist in every neighborhood to the ISP and coaxial cable
further connects the nodes to the houses. This is sometimes referred to as a
hybrid fiber coax (HFC). Have a look at the figure below to see how hybrid
fiber coax works.
... an entire
neighborhood
Optical Node
ISP
Fiber
Coaxial Cable
Hybrid Fiber Coax
Transmission Rate #
According to DOCSIS 4.0, cable Internet can now operate in symmetric speeds
(where both upstream and downstream channels have the same speed) of up
to 10 gbps.
Fiber To The Home: FTTH #
Although DSL and cable Internet are incredibly popular, Fiber To The Home
or FTTH is another access method. Optic fiber cables are claimed to be the
cleanest method to transmit data. We’ll discuss them in more depth in the
next lesson.
Transmission Rate #
FTTH can be very fast – up to 2.5 gbps.
ca
be
e y ast
up to
.5 gbps.
Dial-Up #
Dial-Up uses a modem over the telephone line, but does not fully utilize the
spectrum of the transmission medium. It only uses the traditional voice
channel frequencies. Hence, it is slower than DSL.
Transmission Rate #
Dial-up is non-broadband and very uncommon now. The speed is at most 56
kbps.
Satellite #
The Internet can also be accessed via satellites. This can be beneficial in
remote areas where other physical access networks are not available.
Transmission Rate #
This would depend on a number of factors including the kind of satellite.
Some setups can provide incredibly fast downlink and uplink connections,
however, on average, the download rate is at around 1 mbps and the average
upload rate 256 kbps.
Quick Quiz! #
1
Which access network utilizes telephony infrastructure on the last
mile?
A) Dial-up
B) Fiber To The Home
C) DSL

---PAGE 11---
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 4
D) Both A and C
In the next chapter, we’ll start to look at types of computer networks.
Types by Physical Medium: Guided Physical Media
Now that we've discussed the infrastructure of the edge of the Internet let's discuss
some actual hardware components.
We'll cover the following
• Communication Media
• The Internet Is Under the Sea, Not in the Clouds!
• Quick Quiz!
Communication Media #
Data needs to be transmitted from one end system to another over a medium.
There are two kinds of media: guided and unguided. Each has its own
advantages and disadvantages. Let’s discuss the common guided ones in more
detail now.
Guided Media
A medium in which the signal is transported on a
confined pathway is called guided. Some commonly
used examples are given below.
Twisted Pair Copper Wire
This kind of wire is used in DSL and Dial-Up. It
consists of pairs of copper wires that are twisted
together to reduce electrical interference. Each wire
is about a milimeter thick and is one
communication link. Generally, several pairs are
bundled together in a protective plastic or rubber
wrapping.
Twisted pair copper wire taken from
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:TwistedPair_S-
FTP.jpg under GNU free documentation license
Coaxial Cable
Cable Internet runs on coaxial cables. A coaxial
cable consists of one copper wire surrounded by an
insulating material, followed by a mesh-like
cylindrical metallic shield, followed by another
insulating cover.
Fiber Optics
Fiber optic cables carry light instead of electrical
signals.
Metallic media suffer from electrical noise and
interference from nearby electrical sources such as
mains wiring. Since optical fiber carries signals in
the form of light, it is not susceptible to the
abundant electrical noise and interference.
Coaxial Cable taken from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Coaxial_cable_cutaway.svg
under CC-BY-3.0
Interference from other light sources is easily mitigated by opaque covering
around the optic fiber. Hence, these cables can have incredibly fast
transmission rates and can be stretched out over long distances, unlike the
rest.
Optical fibers are frequently used in public and
enterprise networks when the distance between the
communication devices is larger than one
kilometer.
There are two main types of optical fibers:
multimode and single mode.
Multimode
Multimode uses LED send signals.
Therefore it’s, significantly cheaper than
counterpart.
It can work over several tens of kilometers.
Multiple light signals travel through the same
}ber optic cable taken from
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Optical_}ber_cable.jp
under CC-BY-SA 3.0
p
g
g
g
optic fiber while reflecting off the edges of the
fiber at different angles.
Monomode
Monomode uses laser for transmission.
It’s more expensive than multimode.
Monomode fibers can only work over a few
kilometers.
However, fiber optic has not dominated over the rest, because of the high cost
of optical devices. However, fiber to the home is becoming increasingly
common.
Also, check out the Optical Carrier transmission rates. They specify the
transmission rates of fiber optic cable. At the time of writing, they range from
to 51.84 Mbit/sec to 200 Gbit/sec!
The Internet Is Under the Sea, Not in the Clouds! #
Most cross country connections, in fact, are made over fiber optic cable under
the sea. If you’re more interested in how underwater cables work, here is an
interesting YouTube video by Vox called “Thin underwater cables hold the
Internet. See a map of them all.”
Thin underwater cables hold the internet. See a map of them all.
Thin underwater cables hold the internet. See a map of them all.

---PAGE 12---
Quick Quiz! #
1
Why is fiber optic cable not as popular for commercial use as one
would expect considering the advantages of high speed minimal
loss transmission?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) Fiber optic cable is expensive
B) Laying it down under the sea uses significant resources
C) Optical devices are very expensive
D) Coaxial cable and twisted pair copper wire work just as
well for a fraction of the cost
In the next lesson, we’ll look at unguided physical media!
Types by Physical Medium: Unguided Physical Media
In this lesson, we'll discuss unguided physical media.
We'll cover the following
• Unguided Media
• Terrestrial Radio Channels
• Long-Term Evolution (LTE)
• Free-space optical communication
• Quick Quiz!
Unguided Media #
Means of transmission that are not bound by a confined pathway are called
unguided media, such as radio waves. Let’s discuss them in more detail.
Terrestrial Radio Channels #
Radio waves encompass a certain band of the electromagnetic spectrum. They
provide many advantages, such as not needing to be physically wired through
a building, the ability to cross physical barriers like walls and other objects,
and allowing for end systems to be mobile. However, they also have some
disadvantages: they’re considered to be less secure since interception is
relatively easy.
There are 3 kinds of terrestrial radio channels:
1. The kind that operate over very short distances
1-2 meters (Bluetooth)
2. The kind that operate over a few 10s to a few
hundreds of meters (WiFi)
3. Those that operate over a range of kilometers
3. Those that operate over a range of kilometers
(3G, 4G, and LTE)
The same infrastructure that provides access to
cellphones provides access to the Internet. Users
typically only need to be within a few kilometers of
a base station to connect. Let’s look at a couple of
examples.
Third-Generation Wireless (3G)
Third-generation wireless, or 3G, allows wireless–
wide area Internet access that utilizes existing
telephone networks. It can provide speeds of in
order of 1 Mbps.
the top of a cell tower taken from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cell_site#/media/File:Cell-
Tower.jpg under CC-BY-SA 2.5
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) #
Long-Term Evolution or LTE is rooted in 3G technology, but is faster and can
achieve transmission rates of 10s of Mbps. Don’t let the name confuse you, it is
not technologically very different from 3G.
Free-space optical communication #
Free space optical communication is a medium that employs light to
transmit data. Among the many uses are: communication in space and in
remote controls.
In free space optics, lasers can be used to achieve high data rates. However,
free space optics suffers from interference by factors like fog, dust particles
and smog. Recently, researchers have demonstrated the utility of free space
optics for high speed communication in data centers.
Quick Quiz! #
Quick quiz on physical media!
1
Which of the following is not guided media?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) Coaxial cable
B) Ethernet cable
C) Radio waves
D) Fiber Optic cable
In the next lesson, we’ll study different types of networks.

---PAGE 13---
Types by Geographical Distance
In this lesson, we'll discuss the types of networks based on geographical distance.
We'll cover the following
• Introduction
• Local Area Networks (LANs)
• Ethernet
• WiFi
• Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
• Wide Area Networks (WAN)
• SONET/SDH
• Frame Relay
• Quick Quiz!
Introduction #
Computers or end systems are generally connected together to share
resources and information such as an Internet connection and devices such as
printers. These networks can be classified by the geographical distance that
they span. Have a look.
Local Area Networks (LANs) #
A Local Area Network, or a LAN, is a computer network in a small area like a
home, office, or school.
📝 Note ‘small area’ does not imply anything about the number of end
systems connected together – just the geographical area. A LAN can
consist of hundreds or even thousands of systems.
Let’s discuss some examples of LANs which also are access networks that we
skipped previously.
Ethernet #
Most LANs consist of end hosts connected using Ethernet network adapters to
Ethernet switches. Every Ethernet switch has a limited number of ports, and
therefore can interconnect a limited number of end hosts. Larger networks
within a building are built using multiple Ethernet switches interconnecting
different sets of end hosts. These switches may then be connected to each
other and the Internet
WiFi #
Increasingly, however, wireless Internet access has become very common. In
Wireless LANs or WLANs, a wireless router interconnects different “subnets”
and/or may have connectivity to the Internet, which it can extend to the hosts
connected to it.
Metropolitan Area Network (MAN) #
A metropolitan area network (MAN) is a computer network that spans the
geographical distance of a metropolitan area, such as a city. A MAN may also
refer to a set of interconnected LANs via point-to-point links, for example, on
a university network. Recently, wireless MANs have become increasingly
common.
Wide Area Networks (WAN) #
Wide Area Networks or WANs refer to networks that allow interconnection
across large distances. They may span over cities or even countries.
WANs are typically optical fiber-based. Frame relay, ATM, and SONET/SDH
are examples of technologies that may be in use.
📝 Note The Internet itself is a whole lot of LANs, interconnected by
means of MANs and WANs.
SONET/SDH #
Synchronous optical networking (SONET) and the international equivalent,
Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) carries data as optical signals over
optical fiber, which means that they can cover large distances. These
technologies are incredibly prevalent today.
Frame Relay #
A frame relay was a popular way to connect your LAN to the Internet or to
provide an interconnection between LANs at two or more company sites.
Quick Quiz! #
1
A computer network that spans a large geographical area
connecting several sites of an organization, such as a university or
company, possibly across many countries is called a ______
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) LAN
B) WAN
C) MAN
D) WLAN
In the next lesson, we’ll study some common network topologies!
Types by Topology
We'll study the types of computer networks based on topologies in this lesson.
We'll cover the following
• Bus
• Limitations
• Ring
• Limitations
• Star
• Limitations
• Tree
• Mesh
• Limitations
• Quick Quiz!
Computer networks can also be categorized in terms of network topologies
that you might have studied about in a high school computer science class.
These topologies include: bus, ring, star, tree, and mesh. Note that these
topologies are strictly logical, i.e., they do not dictate how the wires would be
connected physically, but they do dictate how the data flows in the network.
Bus #
Every end system will receive any signal that is sent on the main or backbone
medium. The medium can be guided or unguided.
Limitations #
A break in the cable will disrupt the entire network.
Only one system can transmit at a time.

---PAGE 14---
bus topology
Ring #
In this topology, end systems communicate with each other through each
other. So the message travels along the ring passing each system until the
target system itself is reached. Theoretically, n/2 systems can be transmitting
to their adjacent neighbor at the same time.
Limitations #
The basic ring topology is unidirectional so n −1 end systems would
have to transfer messages for end system #1 to talk to end system #n
A break in the cable will disrupt the entire network.
Ring Topology
Star #
All end systems talk to each other through one central device such as a router
or switch. Routers and switches are discussed in-depth in the data link layer
chapter!
c apte !
Limitations #
Hosts can all be transmitting at the same time. However, if the central
device fails, the network is completely down.
Star topology
Tree #
This topology is also known as the star-bus topology. It essentially consists of
a bunch of star networks connected together with a large bus.
tree topology
Mesh #
In this topology, every end system is directly connected to every other end
system
system.
Limitations #
The mesh topology (if physically realized as a mesh):
Is expensive
Hard to scale
Used in specialized applications only
mesh topology
Quick Quiz! #
1
A disadvantage of the bus topology is that if the backbone wire is
broken, the network may get negatively impacted
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) True
B) False
Starting in the next lesson, we’ll learn about how the working of the Internet
is organized into conceptual layers.

---PAGE 15---
Layered Architectures & Protocol Stacks
Layered architectures are a way to organize computer networks. Let's dive right in!
We'll cover the following
• Introduction to Layered Architectures
• Why Layers?
• An Analogy: Post
• Layers As Services To Each Other: Layers Are Vertical
• Vertical Layers in Post
• Vertical Layers in Networks
• Layers Communicate with Their Parallels: Layers Are Horizontal
• Horizontal Layers in Post
• Horizontal Layers in Networks
• Layers Evolve Independently
• Independent Evolution in Post
• Independent Evolution in Networks
• Encapsulation & Decapsulation
Introduction to Layered Architectures #
When building a large complex system, it helps to approach the problem at
gradually increasing levels of abstraction. Thus, systems can be composed of
layers, each performing a specific set of tasks.
Why Layers? #
Layered architectures give us modularity by allowing us to discuss specific,
well-defined parts of larger systems. This makes changing
implementation-level details and identifying bugs easier.
An Analogy: Post #
Before we dive deep into different models of the network layer stack, let’s look
at an interesting analogy.
Think about posting a letter or a package. The general steps to doing so are as
follows,
The letter is received at the local
post office on the receiver's end
Sender
Post Office
Transportation
Postman
Transportation
Post Office
Postman
Receiver
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
The letter is written, wrapped in an envelope,
and put in a mailbox for a postman to pick up
The local post office sorts
the letter and sends it
Transportation such as a plane, ship, or van takes
the letter to the receiver's local post office. This
actually may be a chain of transportation mediums.
The letter is taken from the post office
to the receiver's address by a postman
The letter is read
Postman picks the letter up and takes it
to the post office to be shipped
Transportation such as a plane, ship, or van takes
the letter to the receiver's local post office. This
actually may be a chain of transportation mediums.
Posting a letter
Notice that a few things are in parallel with computer networking here.
Here are some examples of how that is the case:
Layers As Services To Each Other: Layers Are
Vertical #
Each layer provides some services to the layer above it. Furthermore, the
layer above is not concerned with the details of how the layer below
performs its services. This is called abstraction. So in this way, the layers
communicate with each other in a vertical fashion.
Vertical Layers in Post #
In our letter analogy, each layer is servicing the layer above it. For instance,
the postman provides services to the senders and receivers. They collect
dropped letters from mailboxes and deliver mail to the houses.
Furthermore, all a sender knows and cares about is that once they write a
letter, put it in an envelope, stick a stamp on it and drop it in a letterbox, it
will eventually be delivered at the destination. Whether it’s transported on
pickup trucks, on railway trains or by air is irrelevant and immaterial to
senders. So, how layer 4 does its job is irrelevant to the layers above, and
that’s called abstraction.
Vertical Layers in Networks #
Similarly, computer networks are conceptually divided into layers that each
serves the layer above and below it.
For example, the top layer in most layered models is called the
application layer. End-user applications live in the application layer,
which includes the web and email and are almost always implemented in
software. The application layer is also where an outgoing message starts
its journey.
The application needs an underlying service that can get application
messages delivered from source to destination and bring back replies
which is what the layer(s) after do(es).
Since the underlying layer collects messages from the upper layer for delivery
to the destination and hands over messages destined for the upper layer, it
serves the application layer. Furthermore, the application layer abstracts,
and hence is not concerned with any implementation details of the layers
below.
Layers Communicate with Their Parallels: Layers
Are Horizontal #
Note that each layer at the sending end has a parallel in the receiving end.
Horizontal Layers in Post #
In the post analogy, the letter writer and receiver appear to be in direct
communication with each other. The writer writes, the reader reads, oblivious
to the man-hours spent in the lower layers. Similarly, the post office at the
sender’s side is in communication with some other post office. They cooperate
in getting the letter delivered. At the lowest layer, there could be multiple
hops. For instance, there is a bicycle pickup of letters from a box, delivered to
the post office. Then, the letters are bundled and sent by pickup truck to an
airport. The airport flies the postage to a different airport. The airport sends
the postage to a post office by a pickup truck and the delivery ensues.
Sometimes there are multiple entities horizontally, but we only see the sender
and the receiver.
Horizontal Layers in Networks #
This makes more sense in the case of computer networks. For example,
applications in the application layer send and receive data from the network.
The application layer on one end system has a parallel on another end system,
i.e., a chat app on one end system could be communicating with a chat app on
another. These applications in the application layer are seemingly
communicating with each other directly or horizontally. They are not
aware of the layer below.
Application produces data to
send
..
..
..
..
..
..
Application reads data
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
horizontal communcation in networks
Layers Evolve Independently #
Any lower layer in this model provides certain services that the upper layer
can build other services upon. The upper layer can evolve to build different
kinds of services, like going from text-based email to attachments, to the
world wide web, to dynamic websites, interactive gaming, interactive video
conferencing and so on, all happening in the top layer over the same
infrastructure.
Independent Evolution in Post #
1. For instance, the item being sent does not necessarily have to be a letter –
It can also be a package.
2. It can be put in an envelope or a box.
3. It can be taken to the post office, dropped off into a post box, or picked
up.
4. The receiver’s end can be a P.O. box, a home or an office.
Independent Evolution in Networks #
The applications in the application layer can send and receive almost any
form of data, be it an mp3 file or a word document.
Encapsulation & Decapsulation #

---PAGE 16---
Encapsulation & Decapsulation #
Each layer adds its own header to the message coming from above and the
receiving entity on the other end removes it. The information in each header
is useful for transmitting the message to the layer above. Adding the header is
called encapsulation and removing it is called decapsulation. Have a look at
the following slides to see how this works.
Take a look at the following drawing. We have not given names to these layers
because we have not introduced them yet, but the general idea is depicted.
Layer 3
Layer 2
Layer 1
Layer 2
Layer 1
Layer 3
Encapsulation and decapsulation
Now that we have an introduction to layered architectures, let’s discuss a
popular network reference model in the next lesson.
The Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Model
The OSI layer model will help us to understand the overall picture of how computer
networks work without getting into too many low-level details.
We'll cover the following
• Common Models
• The OSI Model
• The Layers of the OSI Model
• Mnemonic
• Application Layer
• Presentation Layer
• Session Layer
• Transport Layer
• Network Layer
• Data Link Layer
• Physical Layer
• Quick Quiz!
Common Models #
There are several models along which computer networks are organized. The
two most common ones are the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model
and the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) model.
We will discuss each model and the differences between the two in detail
starting with the OSI model.
The OSI Model #
The OSI Model was developed in the '70s by the Organization for
Standardization (ISO). At this time, the Internet was in its infancy and its
l h d
f ll
d Th OSI
d l
id
d
d f
protocols had not fully matured. The OSI model provides a standard for
different computer systems to be able to communicate with each other.
The Layers of the OSI Model #
The model splits up a communication system into 7 abstract layers, stacked
upon each other.
Here are the seven layers of the OSI Model.
Application
Session
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
Presentation
The OSI Network Stack
Mnemonic #
A good mnemonic device to help remember these layers is:
Please Do Not Throw Sausage Pizza Away
Application
Session
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
Presentation
Please
Do
Not
Throw
Sausage
Pizza
Away
Mnemonic to Memorize the Layers of The Network Stack
Mnemonic to Memorize the Layers of The Network Stack
Network protocols are implemented in software, hardware or a combination
of both, and their hardware and software components are organized into
these layers. So the main purpose of this ‘network stack’ is to understand
how the components of these protocols fit into the stack and work with
each other.
Here are some key responsibilities of each layer. Note that we are listing only
some of the responsibilities of each layer. The exhaustive discussion is
deferred to later chapters.
Application Layer #
These applications or protocols are almost always implemented in
software.
End-users interact with the application layer.
The application layer is where most end-user applications such as web
browsing and email live.
The application layer is where an outgoing message starts its journey so it
provides data for the layer below.
🔎 Did You Know? Ascribing to the OSI model, Layer 8 is a pseudo-layer
that consists of the end-users! A lot of IT support humor has involved
telling unsuspecting non-tech-savvy users that the issue is a “Layer 8
issue.” So the application layer can technically be said to be sitting in
between layers 8 and 6!
Presentation Layer #
Presents data in a way that can be easily understood and displayed by
the application layer.
Encoding is an example of such presentation. The underlying layers
might use a different character encoding compared to the one used
by the application layer. The presentation layer is responsible for the
translation.
Encryption (changing the data so that it is only readable by the parties it

---PAGE 17---
Encryption (changing the data so that it is only readable by the parties it
was intended for) is also usually done at this layer.
Abstracts: the presentation layer assumes that a user session is being
maintained by the lower layers and transforms content presentation to
suit the application.
End-to-end Compression: The presentation layer might also implement
end to end compression to reduce the traffic in the network.
Session Layer #
The session layer’s responsibility is to take the services of the transport
layer and build a service on top of it that manages user sessions.
As we will see shortly, the transport layer is responsible for
transporting session layer messages across the network to the
destination. The session layer must manage the mapping of
messages delivered by the transport layer to the sessions.
A session is an exchange of information between local applications and
remote services on other end systems.
For example, one session spans a customer’s interaction with an ecommerce site whereby they search, browse and select products,
then make the payment and logout.
Abstracts: the session layer assumes that connections establishment and
packet transportation is handled by the layers below it.
Transport Layer #
The transport layer also has protocols implemented largely in software.
Since the application, presentation and session layers may be handing off
large chunks of data, the transport layer segments it into smaller chunks.
These chunks are called datagrams or segments depending on the
protocol used.
Furthermore, sometimes some additional information is required to
transmit the segment/datagram reliably. The transport layer adds this
information to the segment/datagram.
An example of this would be the checksum, which helps ensure that
the message is correctly delivered to the destination i e that it’s not
the message is correctly delivered to the destination, i.e. that it’s not
corrupted and changed to something else on the way.
When additional information is added to the start of a
segment/datagram, it’s called a header.
When additional information is appended to the end it’s called a
trailer.
Network Layer #
Network layer messages are termed as packets.
They facilitate the transportation of packets from one end system to
another and help to determine the best routes that messages should
take from one end system to another.
Routing protocols are applications that run on the network layer and
exchange messages with each other to develop information that helps
them route transport layer messages.
Load Balancing There are many links (copper wire, optical fiber,
wireless) in a given network and one objective of the network layer is to
keep them all roughly equally utilized. Otherwise, if some links are
under-utilized, there will be concerns about the economic sense of
deploying and managing them.
Data Link Layer #
Allows directly connected hosts to communicate. Sometimes these hosts
are the only two things on a physical medium. In that case, the challenges
that this layer addresses include flow control and error
detection/correction.
Encapsulates packets for transmission across a single link.
Resolves transmission conflicts i.e., when two end systems send a
message at the same time across one singular link.
Handles addressing If the data link is a broadcast medium, addressing is
another data link layer problem,
Multiplexing & Demultiplexing:
Multiple data links can be multiplexed into something that appears
like one, to integrate their bandwidths.
Likewise, sometimes we disaggregate a single data link into virtual
data links which appear like separate network interfaces
data links which appear like separate network interfaces.
Physical Layer #
Consists largely of hardware.
Provides a solid electrical and mechanical medium to transmit the data.
Transmits bits. Not logical packets, datagrams, or segments.
Also has to deal with mechanical specifications about the makeup of the
cables and the design of the connectors.
We’ve mostly already studied what constitutes the physical layer. We don’t
need to know more than what we’ve looked at in the Phyical Communication
Media chapter.
Have a look at the following slides to understand how data would
conceptually travel through the layers.
Application
Presentation
Session
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
Application
Presentation
Session
Transport
Data Link
Physical
Network
The application layer writes out streams
of data to the presentation layer
How data conceptually travels through the layers
1 of 13
Quick Quiz! #

---PAGE 18---
1
How many layers does the OSI model have?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 5
A) six
B) eight
C) nine
D) seven
E) four
Conceptualizing networks into layers like this had a significant impact on
networking education, which is why it’s still taught as the primary model in a
lot of courses. However, now that protocols have matured, a better way to
teach networks is to take a more protocol-oriented approach. This is where
the TCP/IP model comes in which is what we’ll look at in the next lesson.
The TCP/IP Model
Let's now have a look at the TCP/IP Model
We'll cover the following
• Introduction
• The Layers of The TCP/IP Stack
• TCP/IP vs OSI
• Key Differences
• Differences in Layer Functionality
• There is No Unanimous Stack
• The End-To-End Argument in System Design
• Packet Switched Core
• Quick Quiz!
Introduction #
The TCP/IP Model, also known as the Internet protocol suite, was
developed in 1989.
Its development was funded by DARPA (Advanced Research Projects
Agency (ARPA) was renamed to the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA)!)
Its technical specifications are detailed in RFC 1122.
This model is primarily based upon the most protocols of the Internet,
namely the Internet Protocol (IP) and the Transmission Control
Protocol (TCP).
The protocols in each layer are clearly defined, unlike in the OSI model.
In this course, we’ll largely adhere to the TCP/IP model and take a
protocol-oriented approach.
The Layers of The TCP/IP Stack #
The TCP/IP model splits up a communication system into 5 abstract layers,
stacked upon each other. Each layer performs a particular service and
communicates with the layers above and below itself.
Here are the five layers of the TCP/IP model:
Application
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
The Network Stack
TCP/IP vs OSI #
Key Differences #
Here are some main differences between TCP/IP and OSI.
TCP/IP
OSI
Is used practically
The OSI model is conceptual and is
not practically used for
communication.
Consists of five layers
Consists of seven layers
Elaborating further on the first point, OSI is a theoretical model and
works very well for teaching purposes, but it’s far too complex for anyone
to implement.
TCP/IP, on the other hand, wasn’t really a model. People just implemented
it and got it to work Then people reverse engineered a reference
it and got it to work. Then, people reverse-engineered a reference
model out of it for theoretical and pedagogical purposes. So, something
that “sounds like” a great idea might not be the eventual winner. It’s de
facto vs de jure standards.
Differences in Layer Functionality #
The layers in the TCP/IP stack largely perform the same functions as their
counterparts in the OSI model, except that the application layer in the TCP/IP
model encompasses the functionalities of the top three layers of the OSI
model.
Have a look at the following diagram for a more concrete view.
Session
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
Application
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
Presentation
Application
OSI Model
TCP/IP Model
The Network Stack
There is No Unanimous Stack #
This is an example of where primary sources like RFCs clash with secondary
sources like textbooks. There is, in fact, an entire table on Wikipedia dedicated
to the prominent layer stacks! Regardless, we’ll be sticking to the TCP/IP model
described above.
The End-To-End Argument in System Design #
The TCP/IP protocol suite is heavily influenced by the following design choice,
also known as the end-to-end argument

---PAGE 19---
also known as the end to end argument.
Implementing intelligence in the core was too expensive, therefore,
intelligence was implemented at edge devices. So, the Internet’s design was of
intelligent end devices and a dumb and fast core network.
Packet Switched Core #
Furthermore, the core was made packet-switched, which means that packets
are routed per-hop, so they can circumvent failures because the requirement
was for resilience.
With circuit-switched networks, however, torn connections have to be reestablished, if there is still a path.
Quick Quiz! #
1
The responsibilities of the presentation layer from the OSI model
are handled by the ______ layer in the TCP/IP model.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) Network
B) Transport
C) Application
D) Data Link
Let’s start on the application layer from the next chapter!
What Is the Application Layer?
Here's an introduction to the application layer!
We'll cover the following
• You Are Here!
• Key Responsibilities of the Application Layer
• The Post Analogy
• Where It Exists
• Application Layer Protocols
You Are Here! #
We’re starting our study of the TCP/IP layers with the application layer.
Application
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
you
are
here
Key Responsibilities of the Application Layer #
The main job of the application layer is to enable end-users to access the
Internet via a number of applications. This involves:
Writing data off to the network in a format that is compliant with the
protocol in use.
Reading data from the end-user.
Providing useful applications to end users.
Some applications also ensure that the data from the end-user is in the
correct format.
Error handling and recovery is also done by some applications.
The Post Analogy #
Imagine you post a package across the world.
Presumably, the post system would hand it off to an airplane or ship to
transport it across the world.
However, you would take it to the post office first to be shipped off.
Carrying the package to the post office is what the application layer
does in networks, except that it carries messages to the transport
layer!
Where It Exists #
The application layer resides entirely on end-systems. These end-systems can
be any Internet-enabled device, be it a refrigerator or a tower PC.
Application Layer Protocols #
Most would argue that user applications are the true purpose of the
Internet. If useful applications did not exist, the Internet would not be
what it is today.
The development of the Internet in the last century started with textbased network apps such as e-mail.
Then came the app: the World Wide Web which revolutionized
everything.
Instant messaging came at the end of the millennium, which has
changed the way we communicate.
Since then, we have come up with voice over IP, (WhatsApp calls), video
chat (Skype), and video streaming (YouTube).
Social media has also taken the world by storm resulting in complex
human social networks and businesses building on top of these websites.
All of these applications run on application layer protocols. Due to the

---PAGE 20---
presence of these standard protocols, client applications developed by various
vendors can talk to server applications developed by others!
Let’s uncover some of the underlying application layer protocols, in the next
few lessons.
Network Application Architectures
In this lesson, we'll learn about network application architectures.
We'll cover the following
• Client-Server Architecture
• Servers
• Clients
• An Example
• Data Centers
• Peer-to-Peer Architecture (P2P)
• An Example
• Hybrid
• Quick Quiz!
Before we start off with application layer protocols, it’s important to
understand how applications are structured across end systems. This is
called the network application’s architecture and it’s designed by application
developers. The architecture lays out how the application communicates
and with what.
Let’s discuss some common application architectures.
Client-Server Architecture #
In this architecture, a network application consists of two parts: client-side
software and server-side software. These pieces of software are generally
called processes, and they communicate with each other through messages.
Servers #
The server process controls access to a centralized resource or service such as
a website.
Servers have two important characteristics:
1. Generally, an attempt is made to keep servers online all the time,
although 100% availability is impossible to achieve. Furthermore, servers
set up as a hobby or as an experiment may not need to be kept online.
Nevertheless, the client must be able to find the server online when
needed, otherwise, communication wouldn’t take place.
2. They have at least one reliable IP address with which they can be
reached.
A good analogy is a 24/7 pizza delivery place. They are always open and have
a phone number with which they can always be reached.
Clients #
Client processes use the Internet to consume content and use the services.
Client processes almost always initiate connections to servers, while server
processes wait for requests from clients.
An Example #
A good example of the client-server architecture is the web.
Take Google for instance. Google has several servers that control access to
videos. So when a google.com is accessed, a client process (a browser)
requests Google’s homepage from one of Google’s servers. That server was
presumably online, got the request, and granted access to the page by sending
it.
Data Centers #
Now, you might have noticed that we mentioned that Google has servers and
not one server. That’s because, as mentioned previously, when client-server
applications scale, one or even two servers can’t handle the requests from a
large number of clients. Additionally, servers may crash due to any reason
and might stop working. Most applications have several servers in case one
fails. Therefore, several machines host server processes (these machines are
called servers too), and they reside in data centers.
Data centers are buildings that house servers. Facebook, for example, has
“nearly 15 million square feet of data center space completed or under
construction, with several million more feet in the planning stages” as of 2018.
Client
Server
Show me a video on YouTube
Sure, here it is.
Clients obtain content (such as videos) and/or services (such as an online calculator) from servers.
Peer-to-Peer Architecture (P2P) #
In this architecture, applications on end-systems called ‘peers’ communicate
with each other. No dedicated server or large data center is involved. Peers
mostly reside on PCs like laptops and desktops in homes, offices, and
universities.
The key advantage of the P2P architecture is that it can scale rapidly – without
the need of spending large amounts of money, time or effort.
Peers communicate with each other without a dedicated server
Regardless of P2P’s decentralized nature, each peer can be categorized as
servers or clients i.e., every machine is capable of being a client as well as a
server. Strictly speaking, the peer that initiates a connection is the client, and
the other one is called the server.
An Example #

---PAGE 21---
a
p e 
A lot of popular applications today, like BitTorrent, are based on P2P
architectures.
When a file is downloaded via BitTorrent, the downloading party accesses bits
of the file on several other users’ computers and puts them together on its
end. No traditional ‘server’ is involved in this scenario.
📝 Note: P2P Is Not the Same as File Sharing! Some early P2P
applications were used for file sharing. For example, Napster and
Gnutella. Because of the massive impact of these P2P applications, a lot
of people associate file sharing exclusively with P2P. 
File sharing is a specific application. Whereas P2P is a design principle
for distributed systems and an application architecture. 
Also, file sharing is not the only application of P2P. Other examples
include: streaming media, telephony, content distribution, routing, and
volunteer computing.
Hybrid #
The hybrid architecture involves server involvement to some degree. It’s
essentially a combination of the P2P and client-server architectures.
Quick Quiz! #
1
What architecture is the web based on?
A) P2P
B) Client-Server
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 5
C) Distributed
D) Hybrid
Let’s look at how processes communicate across machines in the next lesson!
P2P vs. Client-Server
Before we move on with the details of BitTorrent, it's useful to do a quantitative
comparison of the hybrid architecture with the client-server architecture.
We'll cover the following
• Quantitative Comparison of P2P with Client-Server
• Client-Server
• P2P
• Quick Quiz!
Quantitative Comparison of P2P with Client-
Server #
Let’s calculate how long it will take to transmit a file from one server to a
number of clients based on both the P2P and server-client architectures. The
calculations will be performed based on the following givens.
A server that can upload at a rate of up  where up  is the upload speed
in bits/second.
There are N clients all wanting to download the same file from the
server. Client i can upload at a rate of up  bits/second and download at a
rate of dwn  bits/second.
The size of the file that all the peers want is S.
Client-Server #
Let’s start with the client-server architecture. The following can be observed.
Since N clients each want a file of size S, the server will have to upload 
NS bits. The upload rate of the server is up  so the server will take at
least 
 time to transmit the file to all N clients.
The client with the lowest download rate (dwn
= min(dwn )) will
take at least 
 time to download the full file.
s
s
i
i
s
ups
NS
min
i
dwn
i
S
So, in total the time taken to transmit the file will be the maximum of both of
the times above, i.e.:
max {
,
}
dwnmin
ups
NS
dwnmin
S
P2P #
We can make the following observations:
Initially, only the server has the file. It has to throw the file out into the
network and to do that, it will take at least 
 time. While the file is
being sent out into the network of peers, they start to distribute it
amongst themselves.
The peer with the lowest download rate (dwn
) will take at least 
time to download the full file.
The file cannot be transmitted faster than the total upload speed of the
entire network: (up
= {up + up + up + ... + up }). Since the
file has to be distributed to all N peers, NS bits have to be transmitted,
that will take 
 time.
Therefore, the time taken in total to distribute a file of size S to N peers is:
max {
,
,
}
Note that as the number of clients/peers, N, grows, the time taken by the
client-server architecture also grows. Here is a graph of how the distribution
time grows for each architecture as the number of clients/peers grow:
ups
S
min
dwnmin
S
sum
1
2
3
N
upsum
NS
ups
S
dwnmin
S
upsum
NS

---PAGE 22---
Graph of How p2p Scales vs Client-Server attributed to:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/3de3/1a9b45a3d071c638574117af8e046b578004.pdf
P2P networks are extremely mathematically scalable. The resources of a
P2P system grows with the number of peers in the system. Thus, applications
with P2P architecture are self-scaling.
Quick Quiz! #
1
In a client-server model, the rate at which a client can download a
file is limited by the ______.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) server upload rate
B) client download rate
C) min( a , b )
Let’s now get into how processes communicate!