# Extracted: Network 2.pdf (21 pages)


---PAGE 1---
How Processes Communicate
Let's have a quick look at the technical aspect of how applications communicate
We'll cover the following
• Program vs. Process vs. Thread
• Sockets
• Addressing
• Quick Quiz!
Program vs. Process vs. Thread #
We’ve loosely used the term ‘process’ pretty much interchangeably with the
term ‘application’ in the last few chapters. Now, let’s now get a finer
definition.
A program is simply an executable file. An application such as MS Word
is one example.
A process is any currently running instance of a program. So one
program can have several copies of it running at once. One MS Word
program can have multiple open windows.
A thread is a lightweight process. One process can have multiple running
threads. The difference between threads and processes is that threads do
lightweight singular jobs.
Here’s the MS Word example illustrated:
A Program:
MS Word
A Process:
Editing a
document
A Process:
Creating a new
document
A Process:
Opening a
Document
Thread 1:
Saves images
Thread 2:
Handles fonts
Thread 1: Sets
up page from
template
Thread 2:
Loads default
fonts
Thread 1: Gets
Document from
memory
Examples of programs, processes, and threads
Processes that exist on the same machine can and do regularly communicate
with each other following the rules of the machine’s OS. However, we are
more interested in how processes that run on different machines
communicate.
Sockets #
Processes on different machines send messages to each other through the
computer network. The interface between a process and the computer
network is called a socket. Note that sockets do not have anything to do with
hardware – they are software interfaces.
Processes simply direct their messages to sockets and don’t worry about it
after that.
Addressing #
Messages have to be addressed to a certain application on a certain end
H
i i d
i h
i ll
illi
f
d
d h
d
d
system. How is it done with potentially millions of end systems and hundreds
of applications on each of them?
Well, it’s done via addressing constructs like IP addresses and ports. While
both were touched upon previously, we would like to reintroduce ports a bit
more in-depth.
Ports
Since every end-system may have a number of
applications running, ports are used to address the
packet to specific applications. As stated previously,
some ports are reserved such as port 80 for HTTP
and port 443 for HTTPS.
An Analogy: Post
Continuing with our post analogy, you can think of
an end-system like a large apartment complex. Each
apartment in the complex is an application.
The mailing address of the complex is like the IP
address of the end-system. All running applications
share it, just like all apartments share the street
address. Each application running on a host has a
different port number, just like each apartment has a
different apartment number.
Ephemeral Ports
The port that an application will use is usually
predefined by its application developers. So an
application can have port 3000 reserved for it. But
what if several instances (processes) of an
application are running at once? How will the
system address those processes?
Well, the answer lies in Ephemeral Ports. Different port numbers are
dynamically generated for each instance of an application. The port is freed
once the application is done using it.
Furthermore, server processes need to have well defined and fixed port
numbers so that clients can connect to them in a systematic and predictable
way. However, clients don’t need to have reserved ports. They can use
ephemeral ports. Servers can also use ephemeral ports in addition to the
reserved ones. For instance, a client makes the initial connection to the server
on a well-known port and the rest of the communication is carried out by
connecting to an ephemeral port on the server.
Quick Quiz! #
1
A process is a running instance of a program
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
A) True
B) False
Now that we are familiar with some basic application layer terms, in the next
lesson, let’s get into the finer details of some key application layer protocols!

---PAGE 2---
HTTP: The Basics
Welcome to the core of this course! We are }nally getting started with protocols, the }rst
of which is HTTP.
We'll cover the following
• Introduction
• Objects
• The Anatomy of a URL
• HTTP
• HTTP Requires Lower Layer Reliability
• Types of HTTP Connections
• Non-persistent HTTP
• Persistent HTTP
• Quick Quiz!
Introduction #
The Internet was an obscure set of methods for file transfer and email used by
academics and researchers. The World Wide Web was invented to allow the
European research organization CERN to present documents linked by
hypertexts. All of that changed though when it caught the public’s eye and
popularized the Internet. The web was different from other services such as
cable television, because it served content based on demand. People could
watch what they wanted. HTTP or HyperText Transfer Protocol is the
protocol at the core of the web.
Objects #
Web pages are objects that consist of other objects.
An object is simply a file like an HTML file, PNG file, MP3 file, etc.
Each object has a URL
The base object of a web page is often an HTML file that has references
to other objects by making requests for them via their URL.
📝 Note: HTML or HyperText Markup Language is the standard
markup language to build webpages.
The Anatomy of a URL #
A URL, or Universal Resource Locator, is used to locate files that exist on
servers. URLs consist of the following parts:
Protocol in use
The hostname of the server
The location of the file
Arguments to the file
http://www.educative.io/allourses/course.php?auth=44&user=5
1 of 5
HTTP #
Let’s get back into HTTP. It’s a client-server protocol that specifies how Web
clients request Web pages from Web servers and how Web servers send them.
Remember the following diagram from the lesson on Network Application
Architectures? Well, it was actually outlining HTTP in general.
The orange arrow represents an HTTP request
The blue arrow represents an HTTP response
Cli
t
S
Show me a video on YouTube
Sure, here it is.
Client
Server
Clients obtain content (such as videos) and/or services (such as an online calculator) from servers.
The first message is called an HTTP request and the second one an HTTP
response. There’s a whole class of protocols that are considered requestresponse protocols. HTTP is one of them. We will look in more detail at the
HTTP request message in the next lesson and response after that!
Note that HTTP is a stateless protocol: servers do not store any information
about clients by default. So if a client requests the same object multiple times
in a row, the server would send it and would not know that the same client is
requesting the same object repeatedly.
HTTP Requires Lower Layer Reliability #
Application layer protocols rely on underlying transport layer protocols
called UDP (User Datagram Protocol) and TCP (Transmission Control
Protocol).
For now, all you need to know is that TCP ensures that messages are
always delivered. Messages get delivered in the order that they are sent.
UDP does not ensure that messages get delivered. This means that
some messages may get dropped and so never be received.
HTTP uses TCP as its underlying transport protocol so that messages are
guaranteed to get delivered in order. This allows the application to
function without having to build any extra reliability as it would’ve had
to with UDP.
This sort of reliance on other layers for certain jobs is one of the key
advantages of a layered architecture!
TCP is connection-oriented, meaning a connection has to be initiated
with servers using a series of starting messages.
Once the connection has been made, the client exchanges messages with
the server until the connection is officially closed by sending a few
ending messages.
Types of HTTP Connections #
There are two kinds of HTTP connections:
Non-persistent HTTP connections
Persistent HTTP connections
These two kinds of HTTP connections use TCP differently. Let’s discuss the key
advantages and disadvantages of each.
Non-persistent HTTP #
Non-persistent HTTP connections use one TCP connection per request.
Assume a client requests the base HTML file of a web page. Here is what
happens:
1. The client initiates a TCP connection with a server
2. The client sends an HTTP request to the server
3. The server retrieves the requested object from its storage and sends it
4. The client receives the object which in this case is an HTML file. If that
file has references to more objects, steps 1-4 are repeated for each of
those
5. The server closes the TCP connection
For each HTTP request, more requests tend to follow, as well to fetch images,
javascript files, CSS files, and other objects.
The underlying TCP connection requires three TCP messages are sent between
the client and server. Similarly, when the connection is closed, three TCP
messages are sent back and forth between the client and server.
Persistent HTTP #
An HTTP session typically involves multiple HTTP request-response pairs, for
which separate TCP connections are established and then torn down between
the same client and server. This is inefficient. Later on, Persistent HTTP was
developed, which used a single client-server TCP connection for all the HTTP
request-responses for a session.
Typically, if there have been no requests for a while, the server closes the
connection. The duration of time before the server closes the connection is

---PAGE 3---
configurable.
Quick Quiz! #
1
What does HTTP stand for?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 8
A) HyperText Transmission Protocol
B) HyperTime Transmission Plan
C) HyperText Transfer Protocol
D) HandleTransmission Transfer Plan
In the next lesson, we’ll discuss HTTP request messages in more detail.
HTTP: Request Messages
HTTP request messages are a pivotal part of the protocol. Let's have a close look at
them!
We'll cover the following
• Introduction
• HTTP Request Messages
• The Anatomy of an HTTP Request Line
• HTTP Methods
• URL
• Version
• The Anatomy of HTTP Header Lines
Introduction #
There are two types of HTTP messages as discussed previously:
HTTP request messages
HTTP response messages
We’ll study request messages in this one.
HTTP Request Messages #
Let’s look at request messages first. Here is an example of a typical HTTP
message:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
GET /path/to/file/index.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.educative.io
Connection: close
User-agent: Mozilla/5.0
Accept-language: fr
Accept: text/html
an HTTP request message
It should be noted that,
HTTP messages are in plain ASCII text
Each line of the message ends with two control characters: a carriage
return and a line feed: \r\n .
The last line of the message also ends with a carriage return and a
line feed!
This particular message has 6 lines, but HTTP messages can have one or
as many lines as needed.
The first line is called the request line while the rest are called header
lines.
The Anatomy of an HTTP Request Line #
The HTTP request line is followed by an HTTP header. We’ll look at the
request line first. The request line consists of three parts:
Method
URL
Version
Let’s discuss each.
GET path/to/file HTTP 1.1
HTTP request line
1 of 4
HTTP Methods #
HTTP methods tell the server what to do. There are a lot of HTTP methods but
we’ll study the most common ones: GET , POST , HEAD , PUT , or DELETE .
GET  is the most common and requests data.
POST  puts an object on the server.
This method is generally used when the client is not sure where the
new data would reside. The server responds with the location of the
object.
The data posted can be a message for a bulletin board, newsgroup,
mailing list, a command, a web form, or an item to add to a database.
The POST method technically requests a page but that depends on
what was entered.
HEAD  is similar to the GET  method except that the resource requested
does not get sent in response. Only the HTTP headers are sent instead.
This is useful for quickly retrieving meta-information written in
response headers, without having to transport the entire content. In
other words, it’s useful to check with minimal traffic if a certain
object still exists. This includes its meta-data, like the last modified
date. The latter can be useful for caching.
This is also useful for testing and debugging.
PUT  uploads an enclosed entity under a supplied URI. In other words,
it puts data at a specific location. If the URI refers to an already existing
resource, it’s replaced with the new one. If the URI does not point to an
existing resource, then the server creates the resource with that URI.
DELETE  deletes an object at a given URL.
Note that while most forms are sent from the POST method, the GET method is
also used sometimes with the entries of the form appended to the URL, as in
arguments like this:
http://www.website.com/form.php/?Name=PostMan?Age=45?Interest=Post
forms with GET requests
However, sending forms with a POST request is generally better because:

---PAGE 4---
1. The amount of data that can be sent via a post request is unlimited.
2. The form’s fields are not shown in the URL.
📝 Note: URIs & URLs
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) URLs are used to identify an
object over the web. RFC 2396. A URL has the following format:
protocol://hostname:port/path-and-file-name
Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) can be more specific than
URLs in such a way that they can locate fragments within objects
too RFC 3986. A URI has the following format:
http://host:port/path?request-parameters#nameAnchor . For instance,
https://www.educative.io/collection/page/10370001/610552069803212
8/6460983855808512/#http-methods  is a URI.
URL #
This is the location that any HTTP method is referring to.
Version #
The HTTP version is also specified in the request line. The latest version of
HTTP is HTTP/2.
The Anatomy of HTTP Header Lines #
The HTTP request line is followed by an HTTP header. A lot of HTTP headers
exist! We’ll be covering the most important ones in this lesson. However, if
you’re interested, you can read further about all of them.
The first header line specifies the Host  that the request is for.
The second one defines the type of HTTP Connection . It’s Non-persistent
in the case of the following drawing as the connection is specified to be
closed.
The user-agent  line specifies the client. This is useful when the server
has different web pages that exist for different devices and browsers.
The Accept-language  header specifies the language that is preferred. The
server checks if a web page in that language exists and sends it if it does,
otherwise the server sends the default page.
The Accept  header defines the sort of response to accept. It can be
anything like HTML files, images, and audio/video.
GET/path/to/file/index.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.educative.io
Connection: close
User-agent:Mozilla/5.0
Accept-language: fr
Accept: text/html
1 of 7
In the next lesson, we’ll conduct an exercise to look at real HTTP request
messages!
Exercise: Looking at a Real HTTP Request
In this lesson, you will be looking at real HTTP messages right from your browser!
We'll cover the following
• Open up the Developer Tools on Your Browser
• Go to the Network Tab
• Click on Any Entry
• An Example of an Entry
Open up the Developer Tools on Your Browser #
Have a look at this GIF. We were on Firefox here.
1. Navigate to any website. We picked google.com.
2. Right-click anywhere.
3. Click on ‘inspector tools’ in the drop-down menu.
The process should be similar for other browsers.
Go to the Network Tab #
1. The network tab should be one of the tabs on the top-bar (or sidebar in
some browsers).
2. Find it and click on it.
3. There may be a chance that your browser hasn’t logged any network
calls. In that case, just reload the page.
Click on Any Entry #
1. You’ll see a bunch of calls. Click on any one of them.
2. You’ll see details about the HTTP message including the request headers,
the kind of request, and the headers. We encourage you to spend some
time exploring this.
A
E
l
f
E t
#

---PAGE 5---
An Example of an Entry #
IP address of remote server. Notice the port number is
443 which is reserved for HTTPS
Status code: 200 ok means the resource was found.
The response headers. Try tallying each
with what we learned in the last lesson.
NID=somehiddenstring
Now that we have a clear idea of what HTTP request messages look like, let’s
study the response messages in the next lesson.
HTTP: Response Messages
Let's look at what HTTP response messages look like!
We'll cover the following
• Introduction
• Status Line
• Status Code
• Header Lines
• How HTTP Headers Are Chosen
• Quick Quiz on HTTP!
Introduction #
Let’s start with a typical example of an HTTP response message:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Connection: close
Date: Tue, 18 Aug 2015 15: 44 : 04 GMT
Server: Apache/2.2.3 (CentOS)
Last-Modified: Tue, 18 Aug 2015 15:11:03 GMT 
Content-Length: 6821
Content-Type: text/html
[The object that was requested]
It has 3 parts: an initial status line, some header lines and an entity body.
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Connection: close
Date: Tue, 18 Aug 2015 15: 44 : 04 GMT
Server: Apache/2.4.39 (CentOS)
Last-Modified: Th, 08 Aug 2013 23:54:35 GMT
Content-Length: 6821
Content-Type: text/html
[The object that was requested]
Status
Header Lines
object
An HTTP response message
📝 Note: HTTP response messages don’t have the URL or the
method fields. Those are strictly for request messages.
Status Line #
HTTP response status lines start with the HTTP version.
Status Code #
The status code comes next which tells the client if the request
succeeded or failed.
There are a lot of status codes:
1xx codes fall in the informational category
2xx codes fall in the success category
3xx codes are for redirection
4xx is client error
5xx is server error
Here is a list of some common status codes and their meanings:
200 OK : the request was successful, and the result is appended with the
response message.
404 File Not Found : the requested object doesn’t exist on the server.
400 Bad Request : generic error code that indicates that the request was in
a format that the server could not comprehend.
500 HTTP Internal Server Error : the request could not be completed
because the server encountered some unexpected error.
505 HTTP Version Not Supported : the requested HTTP version is not
supported by the server.
Have a look at pages 39 and 40 of RFC 2616 for a comprehensive list.
Header Lines #
Let’s study the header lines.
Connection type. In this case, indicates that the server will close  the
TCP connection after it sends the response.
Date. The date at which the response was generated.
Server. Gives server software specification of the server that generated
the message. Apache in this case.
Last-Modified. The date on which the object being sent was last
modified.
Content-Length. The length of the object being sent in 8-bit bytes.
Content-Type. The type of content. The type of the file is not determined
by the file extension of the object, but by this header.
The response body contains the file requested.
How HTTP Headers Are Chosen #
Lastly, you must be wondering how browsers decide which HTTP headers to
include in requests and how servers decide which headers to return in the
response. That depends on a complex mix of factors such as the browser,
the user configurations and products.
Quick Quiz on HTTP! #

---PAGE 6---
1
What is HTTP?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 5
A) HTTP stands for Hypertext Transfer Protocol. It’s a set of
rules for transferring of data on the web.
B) A language in which websites are written.
C) The world wide web is HTTP
D) The starting of URLs
In the next lesson, we’ll look at real HTTP responses via a simple commandline tool!
Exercise: Looking at a Real HTTP Response
In this lesson, we'll look at and study real HTTP responses via cURL.
We'll cover the following
•
cURL
• Explanation
• Sample Output
• Quick Quiz!
cURL #
Run the following command to look at a real HTTP response.
1
curl http://example.org --head -silent
cURL (pronounced ‘curl’) is a command-line tool that transfers data to or from
a server. The transfer can be based on a vast set of protocols, so we’ll be
seeing cURL a lot. It’s perfect for our purposes because it doesn’t require live
user interaction. cURL stands for “Client URL.” You can read more about cURL
on its manpage.
Explanation #
Let’s learn about all of its components.
curl  is the name of the command that tells the terminal that this is a curl
command.
The --head  flag or -I  in short, tells cURL to send an HTTP request with
the head method. In other words, the entity-body of the HTTP message is
t e
ead
et od.
ot e
o ds, t e e t ty body o t e
essage s
not fetched.
The -silent  flag tells cURL to not display the progress meter. The
progress meter is interpreted as an error on our platform, which is why
we decided to remove it. The command is perfectly fine without this flag
otherwise.
We encourage you to explore the cURL command. You can find a list of all the
flags under the ‘options’ heading on cURL’s manpage. Try different websites
and different flags and see what you get!
Sample Output #
The output of this command is an HTTP response such as the following. Notice
the HTTP response code and the headers.
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Encoding: gzip
Accept-Ranges: bytes
Cache-Control: max-age=604800
Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Date: Mon, 23 Sep 2019 06:48:39 GMT
Etag: "1541025663"
Expires: Mon, 30 Sep 2019 06:48:39 GMT
Last-Modified: Fri, 09 Aug 2013 23:54:35 GMT
Server: ECS (ord/5726)
X-Cache: HIT
Content-Length: 606
Quick Quiz! #
1
What is cURL?
A) A tool that diverts http responses by making them ‘curl’
B) A command line tool that copies URLs
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
C) A command line tool for transferring data based on various
protocols
In the next lesson, let’s have a look at one of the key concepts of computer
networks – cookies!

---PAGE 7---
Cookies
Let's discuss another key concept of computer networking, cookies!
We'll cover the following
•
Set-cookie  Header
• Example
• Blocking Third-Party Cookies Is Not Enough!
• Quick Quiz!
Introduction
You might have heard of the term ‘cookie’ used a lot
in the context of computer networks and privacy.
Let’s have a closer look at what they are.
HTTP is a stateless protocol, but we often see
websites where session state is needed. For instance,
imagine you are browsing for products on an ecommerce website. How does the server know if you
are logged in or not, or if the protocol is stateless?
How does the server know what’s in your shopping
cart when checking out if the protocol is stateless?
Cookies allow the server to keep track of this sort of
information.
How Cookies Work
Cookies are unique string identifiers that can
be stored on the client’s browser.
These identifiers are set by the server through HTTP headers when the
client first navigates to the website.
After the cookie is set, it’s sent along with subsequent HTTP requests to
the same server. This allows the server to know who is contacting it
and hence serve content accordingly.
So the HTTP request, the HTTP response, the cookie file on the client’s
browser, and a database of cookie-user values on the server’s end are all
involved in the process of setting and using cookies.
Set-cookie Header #
Let’s look at how cookies work in a bit more detail. When a server wants to set
a cookie on the client-side, it includes the header Set-cookie: value  in the
HTTP response. This value is then appended to a special cookie file stored
on your browser. The cookie file contains:
The website’s domain
The string value of the cookie
The date that the cookie expires (yes, much like actual cookies, they do
expire)
Have a look at the following slides to see how cookies work in practice.
GET /index.html HTTP 1.1
Accept: image/gif, image/x-bitmap, image/jpeg, */*
Accept-Language: en
Connection: Keep-Alive
User-Agent: Mozilla/1.22
Host: educative.io
Referrer: http:www.google.com?q=best+courses+ever
HTTP Request
First ever request from a client to
educative.io does not contain any cookies.
1 of 3
The Dangers of Cookies ☠ 
While cookies seem like a great idea to make HTTP
persistent when needed, cookies have been
severely abused in the past.
If a website has stored a cookie on your browser, it
knows exactly when you visit it, what pages you
visit and in what order. This itself makes some
people uncomfortable.
Third-party Cookies
Also, websites may not necessarily know personally
identifiable information about you such as your
name (by the way, websites that require you to signup do know your name), and they may only know
the value of your cookie. But what if websites can
track what you do on other websites? Well, they
can. Welcome to the concept of third-party cookies.
cookie monster; image attribution:
https://www.~ickr.com/photos/tomcrouse/23712101336
While we can’t go into too much detail, it suffices to know that third-party
cookies are cookies set for domains that are not being visited.
Example #
1. A user visits amazon.com.
2. A cookie for free-stats.com is subsequently set on their browser because
free-stats has placed an advertisement on Amazon. Notice that this is a
third-party cookie!
3. Suppose, the user visits ebay.com, and eBay also has placed an
advertisement for free-stats.com.
4. The same cookie set on the Amazon site will be reused and sent to
free-stats along in an HTTP request with the name of the host that the
user is on.
5. Free-stats can in this way track every website the user visits that they
are advertising on and create more targeted ads in order to generate
g
g
g
greater revenue.
Also, the public has largely considered third-party cookies to be a breach of
privacy and so rejected them. Most modern browsers come with the in-built
option to block third-party cookies.
Blocking Third-Party Cookies Is Not Enough! #
However, firms have come up with several workarounds including but not
limited to:
Respawning cookies
Flash cookies
Entity tags
Canvas fingerprinting
Quick Quiz! #
1
What is a cookie?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) An identifier that’s stored in client browsers. It’s used by
websites to serve customized content.
B) An http header
C) Only a way to track people across websites
D) They are http headers that make http stateless

---PAGE 8---
Now that we know the basics of cookies, let’s look at them in practice with a
quick exercise!
Exercise: View and Manage Your Cookies
In this lesson, we'll go through an exercise to manage your browser's cookies.
We'll cover the following
• Viewing Cookies For a Page
• Managing Cookies
• Chrome
• Safari
• Firefox
Viewing Cookies For a Page #
For most browsers, while you can’t view your entire cookie file, you can view
cookies for individual websites.
1. Open up any website of your choice.
2. Open up the developer tools. All browsers have some form of developer
tools.
3. Click on the storage tab to view details of the cookies that the website
has set.
Managing Cookies #
Most modern browsers allow some degree of cookie management (viewing,
editing and deleting), which can be integral to protecting your privacy on the
Internet. Here are some links to instructions on how to manage cookies for
popular browsers. Unfortunately, for most browsers, all cookies cannot be
viewed at once, but they can be managed.
Chrome #
Google has provided some instructions to view cookies on Chrome. Have a
look!
Safari #
This Apple Support page has some instructions on managing cookies. While
you can’t view the content of the cookie files, you can view which websites
have stored cookies on your browser.
Firefox #
Here’s an official page to manage cookies on Firefox.
Now that we have a good understanding of HTTP, and HTTP specific
constructs, let’s move on to a new protocol!
Email: SMTP
Let's now discuss some important protocols that make email what it is.
We'll cover the following
• History of SMTP
• How SMTP Works
• Error Handling
• Quick Quiz!
Introduction
Email has been a key application of the Internet since
its early days.
Today, almost all formal or official correspondences
occur on email. In fact, a lot of major corporations
communicate primarily through email both externally
and internally despite the advent of instant messaging.
Let’s see how this evergreen application really works!
SMTP
There are many protocols associated with email. One popular choice is a
combination of POP3  and SMTP . One is used to send emails that are stored in a
user’s inbox and the other is used to retrieve emails sent to you. However, the
very core of electronic mail is the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP).
SMTP uses TCP, which means that transfers are reliable. The connection is
established at port 25 .
📝

---PAGE 9---
📝 Note A good mnemonic to remember what SMTP does is Sending
Mail To People.
Also, for ease and consistency, we are defining User Agents as agents that
allow users to compose, view, delete, reply to, and forward emails.
Applications such as Apple Mail, Microsoft Outlook, and Gmail’s webmail are
examples of user agents.
History of SMTP #
Let’s delve a bit into the history of SMTP which is incredibly important to
understand why it’s designed the way it is.
SMTP predates HTTP by quite a margin and therefore has some antiquated
design properties.
For example, all SMTP messages have to be encoded into 7-bit ASCII. This
made sense in the early days when computer networks did not have the
capacity to email large images, audio, or videos, and when email was
primarily text that could fit in ASCII characters. We needed 7-bit encoding and
decoding because mostly US-ASCII characters were being used in which the
MSB (most significant bit) of the byte was 0, so there was no point in sending 8
bits per character. Instead 7 bits per character were transmitted.
Sending text with characters that require a greater number of bits per
character, or binary data became challenging. Therefore, all email
attachments are encoded into 7-bit ASCII even today when sending, and then
decoded upon receiving. This requires additional computational work.
How SMTP Works #
Let’s look at how this ubiquitous protocol works.
1. When an email is sent, its sent to the sender’s SMTP server using the
SMTP protocol.
The SMTP server is configured in your email client. The general
format of the domain of the SMTP server is smtp.example.com  where
the main email address of the sender is user@example.com . But it’s not
mandatory to adhere to this format. We could set up, say,
zeus.example.com  to serve as our SMTP server, if we wanted. From a
security point of view, it is probably a good idea, since people are
unlikely to guess it as easily.
2. The email is now placed on a message queue in the sending SMTP
server.
3. Then, the SMTP server initiates a connection with the recipient server
and will conduct an initial SMTP handshake.
If the recipient is on the same SMTP server as the sender (for
instance alice@gmail.com sending to bob@gmail.com), then the
SMTP server doesn’t need to connect to the recipient’s server.
4. The SMTP server will finally send the message to the recipient’s email
server.
5. The email is then downloaded from the recipient’s SMTP server using
other protocols when the recipient logs in to their email account or
'user agent.’ In other words, the recipient’s SMTP server copies the email
to the recipient’s mail-box.
📝 Note SMTP is a push protocol because the email client sends the
email out to the server when it needs to. Which means it only sends data
to servers. Other protocols called Mail Access Protocols such as POP
and IMAP are used for getting email from a server and are called pull
protocols because the client asks their POP/IMAP server if they have any
new messages whenever they feel like.
Have a look at the following slides to get a clearer picture.
Sender
Sender's SMTP Server
Recipient's SMTP Server
Recipient
The sender wants to send the receiver an email
1 of 7
Error Handling #
There are many scenarios where sending an email may fail. Here are a few.
If the email is not sent for any reason such as a misspelled recipient
address, the email is returned to the sender with a “not delivered”
message.
If the recipient SMTP server is offline, the sending SMTP server keeps
trying to send the email, say, every 30 minutes or so. It stops trying
after a few days and alerts the sender about the mail not delivered
error.
Also, SMTP does not use any intermediate servers. So, even if an attempt
to send an email fails because of any reason such as the receiving server
being down, the email won’t be stored on an intermediary server. It will
be stored on the sending SMTP server.
Quick Quiz! #
1
SMTP is a pull protocol
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) True
B) False
Let’s do an exercise with another popular command-line tool to check what
your domain’s mail server is in the next lesson!

---PAGE 10---
Exercise: Checking a Domain’s Mail Server with
nslookup
In this lesson, we'll use nslookup to look up a domain's mail server.
We'll cover the following
•
nslookup
• Outlook
• Gmail
• Yahoo!
nslookup #
nslookup , or name server lookup, is a command-line tool that can be used to
find the name and IP address of the SMTP server for a domain like live.com or
gmail.com. Have a look at the following command.
Outlook #
1
nslookup -type=mx https://outlook.live.com
The mx  in the -type=mx  flag stands for Mail Exchanger record, which
essentially means the SMTP server.
There is a lot more that nslookup  can be used for. Here’s the manpage for
nslookup  if you want to learn more.
Ignore what authoritative and non-authoritative mean for now. You’ll
understand them when we get to DNS.
Try any other domain of your choice! Here are a couple of very popular ones.
Gmail #
1
nslookup -type=mx gmail.com
In this case, one of the SMTP servers for Gmail is alt1.gmail-smtpin.l.google.com .
Yahoo! #
1
2
3
nslookup -type=mx mail.yahoo.com
Let’s study pull protocols like POP and IMAP in some detail in the next lesson.
Email: POP & IMAP
Let's now discuss the other side of the coin for how email works.
We'll cover the following
• POP
• POP Phases
• POP Modes
• IMAP
• Quick Quiz!
POP and IMAP are used to retrieve email from an email server. Either one can
be used. Let’s discuss both.
POP #
The most commonly used version of the Post Office Protocol (POP) is version
3, or POP3. This is how it works:
POP Phases #
Emails are simply downloaded from the server in 4 phases: connect,
authorize, transaction, update.
1. Connect: The user agent first connects to the POP3 server on TCP using
port 110 .
2. Authorize: The user agent authenticates the user with a username and a
password.
3. Transaction: The user can now retrieve emails and mark emails for
deletion.
4. Update: After the user agent quits and closes the POP3 session, the server
makes updates based on the user’s commands. So if the user marked an
email for deletion, it will delete it. No copy of a deleted email is kept on
the server
the server.
Note that only what’s in the user’s inbox is downloaded. Other
folders such as sent items, outbox, or drafts are not synced. So POP3
does not synchronize the folders.
POP Modes #
POP works in two modes.
Download and delete: Once emails are downloaded from the server to
the user agent, they are all deleted from there.
Download and keep: Emails are not deleted from the server once they
are downloaded onto the user agent.
However, with the download and delete model, you can only use one client to
check your emails. If you use multiple devices to check your email, this
method is not appropriate because emails will not look the same across
devices at different times. Also, users won’t be able to reread emails from
different devices.
Have a look at the following slides for an example of how emails might not be
in sync on multiple devices with POP.
Sender: work
Subject: Meeting
Sender: Brand
Subject:
Advertisement
Sender: Friend
Subject: Meme
Emails reside on server

---PAGE 11---
1 of 10
IMAP #
The Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP), like POP, is also a mail access
protocol used for retrieving email. It is a bit more complex than POP and
hence allows you to view your email from multiple devices. With IMAP,
though:
Emails are kept on the server and not deleted.
Local copies of the emails are cached on each device.
It syncs up all of the user’s folders including custom folders.
The inbox would look exactly the same on all clients.
If an email is deleted from one user agent, it will be deleted off the
server.
Deleted emails won’t be visible from other devices either.
Quick Quiz! #
Q
Which of the following are valid differences between POP3 and
IMAP?
A)
POP3 is less accurate
IMAP is more accurate
B)
POP3 does not sync folders whereas IMAP does
POP3 might make for different email structures on
different devices
POP3 deletes emails on servers by default but IMAP
does not
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 1
C)
POP3 works more accurately
IMAP is better
D)
POP3 syncs all folders
IMAP does not sync folders across clients
Email: Message Format
Let's study the exact format of an email message!
We'll cover the following
• Introduction
• Header Lines
• Message Body
• Exercise: View Raw Emails
Introduction #
Email messages have a format the same way that HTTP request and response
messages do. Let’s dive right into it.
Header Lines #
Email messages start with header lines, much akin to HTTP. The header lines
contain important metadata about the email.
The header lines consist of keywords followed by a colon, followed by a
value.
Every header line is separated by a new line with a carriage return ( \r ).
Every header must have the To:  and From:  header lines.
The rest of the headers, including the subject:  header line, are optional.
Message Body #
The message body of the email follows the header lines after a blank line.
Here is an example of what an email message looks like:
from: user@gmail.com
to: anotherUser@gmail.com
subject: Network Fundamentals
Header
Lines
Message Message Message
Message
Body
Exercise: View Raw Emails #
Open up your favorite email agent. Google search “view headers with name of
agent.” For example, I could Google “view headers with Gmail.” Here are some
instructions for common clients:
1. Gmail
2. Outlook
3. Yahoo!
Once you have the instructructions, study the headers. Can you figure out
what each does? For your reference, here is a sample of email headers. Note
that they are a bit simplified for your ease.
Delivered-To: user@gmail.com
Date: Thu, 16 May 2019 03:36:28 +0000 (UTC)
From: Fahim from Educative <fahim+newsletter@educative.io>
Mime-Version: 1.0
Reply-to: fahim@educative.io
Subject: Data analysis with R
To: user@gmail.com
 
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8
Mime-Version: 1.0
 
Hey User,
 
With the way technology is evolving, more and more data is being produce
d a=
nd tracked every day. And because of that, the skills to work with that da
t=
a, to make sense of it and turn into useful insight, are more in-demand th
a=
n ever before.
 
If recent trends are anything to go by, in the future the ability to wor
k w=
ith large quantities of data won=E2=80=99t be the field of just data scien
t=
i t
it E2 80 99
i
t
b
kill
i d
t i
k

---PAGE 12---
ists - it=E2=80=99s going to become a necessary skill across industries, k
i=
nd of like using a word processor.
 
For years, R has been at the forefront of the data science revolution. It=
=E2=80=99s beloved by data scientists and statisticians for its robust sta
t=
istical functionality, outstanding graphing ability, and extensibility thr
o=
ugh packages. The recent data science craze has just breathed new life int
o=
 it.
 
Learn R from Scratch https://www.educative.io/collection/6151088528949248/
5=
357220915052544?utm_source=3Dsendgrid&utm_medium=3Demail&utm_campaign=3Dle
a=
rn-r-from-scratch&utm_content=3D is designed to get you up to speed writin
g=
 code in R as quickly as possible. You'll start with the very basics and w
o=
rk your way up to advanced concepts like exception handling. By the time y
o=
u're done, you'll be able to write detailed, useful code in R yourself.
 
Get started with R, stay on top of the data science craze, and solve realw=
orld problems with data.
 
Happy learning!
 
-- Fahim
 
CEO & co-founder, educative.io=20
 
1203 114th Ave SE,=20
Bellevue, WA 98004
📝 Note the headers are from a received email and not the headers
when it was sent, which is what we discussed initially. So, the Delivered-
To  header is derived from the To:  header in the originally sent email.
The SMTP or the POP server probably make this transformation. More
likely the SMTP server.
If you wish to study each of these headers and the format in detail, have a
look at RFC5322.
1
Why is SMTP not used for transferring emails from the recipient’s
mail server to the recipient’s user agent?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 7
A) SMTP is a push protocol whereas the task of transferring
email messages from the recipient’s mail server to the
recipient’s personal computer is a pull operation.
B) SMTP is a pull protocol, whereas the task of transferring
email messages from the recipient’s mail server to the
recipient’s personal computer is a push operation.
C) SMTP is a push protocol whereas the task of transferring
email messages to the recipient’s mail server from the
recipient’s personal computer is a pull operation.
D) SMTP is a pull protocol whereas the task of transferring
email messages to the recipient’s mail server from the
recipient’s personal computer is a push operation.
Now that we have a good idea of email, let’s move on to the directory of the
web: DNS.
DNS: Introduction
DNS is the Internet's directory service. Let's jump right in!
We'll cover the following
• How Do We Find Things on The Internet?
• Distributed Hierarchical Database
• DNS Namespaces
• Root DNS Servers
• Top-level Servers
• Authoritative Servers
• Local DNS Cache
• Local DNS Servers
• Quick Quiz!
How Do We Find Things on The Internet? #
Generally, using one of the following ways:
Addresses or locations that specify where something is.
Just like with a physical address, we still may need a map to get to
the address. On the Internet, the addresses are typically IP addresses,
and routers know the map.
Names. In particular, domain names, or the unique name that identifies
a websites, are mapped into IP addresses based on lookup service that
uses a database. The most well-known lookup service is the Domain
Name System (DNS). So when you enter the URL ‘educative.io’ into your
browser, it uses DNS to find the actual IP address of the server that hosts
it.
Content-based addressing.
The content itself is used to look up its location.

---PAGE 13---
📝 Note A Useful Analogy: Domain names are like actual people
names and IPs are like phone numbers.
In this lesson, our focus will be on DNS, the client-server application layer
protocol that translates hostnames on the Internet to IP addresses.
At the core, the Internet operates on IP addresses, but these are difficult to
remember for humans. So, DNS names are preferably used at the application
layer for which the DNS provides a mapping to IP addresses. For example,
HTTP first translates the DNS hostname provided by the user in the URL to its
IP address and then attempts to connect to the server. Furthermore, DNS is
not just a protocol. It also consists of a distributed database of names that map
to IP addresses. So essentially it’s a directory service.
Distributed Hierarchical Database #
One single database on one single server does not scale for reasons such as:
Single point of failure. If the server that has the database crashes, DNS
would stop working entirely, which is too risky.
Massive amounts of traffic. Everyone would be querying that one server.
It will not be able to handle that amount of load.
Maintenance. Maintaining the server would become critical to the
operation of DNS.
Location. Where would the server be located?
This is why DNS employs several servers, each with part of the database. Also,
the servers exist in a hierarchy. To understand this hierarchy better, you need
to understand how URLs are broken down into their hierarchies. Have a look
at the following diagram.
discuss.educative.io
sub-domain
second-level domain
top-level domain
sub do
a
top e e do
a
DNS Namespaces #
The parts of the URL above roughly map to DNS servers. These servers
manage the abstract space of domains. The servers all exist in a hierarchy.
Have a look at the following diagram.
Root Servers
io Servers
edu Servers
com Servers
educative.io
portfol.io
...
dartmouth.edu
harvard.edu
facebook.com
...
amazon.com
...
...
Top-level
domains
Second-level
domains
A fraction of the hierarchy of DNS servers
Root DNS Servers #
Root DNS servers are the first point of contact for a DNS query (after the
client’s local cache of names and IP addresses). They exist at the top of the
hierarchy and point to the appropriate TLD server in reply to the query. So a
query for educative.io  would return the IP address of a server for the toplevel domain, io .
As of the writing of this course, there are 1017 instances of root servers
operated by 12 different organizations. To get a full list and an interactive
map, have a look at root-servers.org.
Top-level Servers #
Servers in the top-level domain hold mappings to DNS servers for certain
domains. Each domain is meant to be used by specific organizations only.
Here are some common domains:
com: This TLD was initially meant for commercial organizations only -
but it has now been opened for general use.
Example: codinginterview.com
edu: Used by educational institutions.
Example: stanford.edu
gov: Only used by the U.S. government.
Example: nasa.gov
mil: Used by U.S. military organizations.
Example: army.mil
net: It was initially intended for use by organizations working in network
technology such as ISPs, but it is now a general purpose domain like com.
Example: doubleclick.net
org: This domain was intended for non-profit organizations but has been
opened for general use now.
mozilla.org
pk, uk, us,…: Country suffixes. 244 two-letter ones exist.
Some new and uncommon suffixes include: name, mobi, biz, pro.
International domains: 中國
Today, the set of top-level domain-names is managed by the Internet
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN).
Once one of these servers is contacted, it points to the authoritative name
server of that organization.
Authoritative Servers #
Every organization with a public website or email server provides DNS
records. These records have hostname to IP address mappings stored for that
organization. These records can either be stored on a dedicated DNS server
for that organization or they can pay for a service provider to store the
records on their server.
This is the next link in the chain. If this server has the answer that we are
looking for, the IP address that it has is finally returned to the client. However,
this server may not have the sought after answer if the domain has a subdomain. In that case, this server may point to a server that has records of the
subdomain.
For instance, if the DNS record for cs.stanford.edu is being looked for, a DNS
server separate from ‘stanford.edu’ may hold records for the sub-domain ‘cs.’
Local DNS Cache #
DNS mappings are often also cached locally on the client end-system to
avoid repetitive lookups and saves time for often visited websites.
This is done via an entity called the local resolver library, which is part
of the OS. The application makes an API call to this library. This library
manages the local DNS cache.
If the local resolver library does not have a cached answer for the client,
it will contact the organization’s local DNS server.
This local DNS server is typically configured on the client machine either
using a protocol called DHCP or can be configured statically.
So, if it’s configured manually, any local DNS server of the client’s choice
can be chosen. A few open DNS servers are incredibly popular, such as
the ones by Google.
Local DNS Servers #
There is one type of server that we ignored — the local DNS Server. Local
DNS servers are usually the first point of contact after a client checks its local
cache. These servers are generally hosted at the ISP and contain some
mappings based on what websites users visit.
☠ Security Warning: ISPs have a record of which IP address they
assigned to which customers. Furthermore, their DNS server has the IP
addresses of who contacts it and what hostname they were trying to
resolve. So your ISP technically has a record of all of the websites you
visit. Yikes! P.S. if this makes you uncomfortable, you can change your
DNS server to any open public DNS server.
For an overview of how a query is resolved, have a look at the following
slides.

---PAGE 14---
A user
Root Server
Server for 'io'
Server for educative
The user's local DNS server
A user opens up a browser to start working on the networks course that they purchased
1 of 12
Quick Quiz! #
1
Which entity is contacted first when resolving a DNS name?
A) local resolver library
B) root server
C) local DNS server
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
local DNS server
D) .com server
Now that we have an idea of how DNS works, let’s look at an exercise in the
next lesson!
Exercise: Finding Name Servers
In this lesson, we will look at a few command-line tools to lookup domain name servers.
We'll cover the following
• Finding The Authoritative Name Server Using host
• Checking What Your Local DNS Server Is
• Output
Finding The Authoritative Name Server Using
host #
1
host -t ns google.com
host  is a DNS lookup utility. It is normally used to map hostnames to IP
addresses. However, with a combination of flags, it can be programmed to
perform a myriad of DNS-related tasks.
The syntax of the command above, for instance, is
1
host -t ns hostname.com
host  invokes the host command
-t  is the type  flag. It is used to specify the type of the command. Check
out host’s manpage for a list of all the types available.
ns  specifies the type. It stands for the name server in this case.
hostname.com  can be any website of your choice.
We encourage you to experiment, explore, and get creative with the tool!
Checking What Your Local DNS Server Is #
To check the IP address of your local DNS server, run the following command
on UNIX based machines. If you’re on a mobile machine, try
www.whatsmydnsserver.com. There are a lot of instructions available for
Windows machines online.
1
cat /etc/resolv.conf
Output #
Here is what the output may look like
# Dynamic resolv.conf(5) file for glibc resolver(3) generated by resolvcon
f(8)
#     DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE BY HAND -- YOUR CHANGES WILL BE OVERWRITTEN
nameserver 169.254.169.254
search c.educative-exec-env.internal google.internal
You can safely ignore the first two lines since they are comments. On the third
line, nameserver  shows the IP address of the local DNS server. On the last line,
search  represents the default search domain that is used to resolve a query
for a domain with no suffix (for example, www.facebook).
📝 Note: Educative’s code widgets run on a remote server. The code
runs there, the output is then sent back to your machine and displayed.
So, the DNS server shown here is local to the server that runs Educative’s
code.
Now that we have a good idea of how DNS works, let’s study DNS records and
messages in the next lesson.

---PAGE 15---
DNS: Records and Messages
Let's now get into what DNS records and messages look like.
We'll cover the following
• Resource Records
• Format
• Types of RRs
• DNS Messages
Resource Records #
The DNS distributed database consists of entities called RRs, or Resource
Records.
Format #
RRs are 4-tuples with the following entries:
(name, value, type, ttl)
Every resource record has a type  and a TTL  along with a name-value  pair.
The TTL specifies how long an RR entry can be cached by the client. The
remaining fields are described for each RR type below.
Types of RRs #
Address
Type A  addresses are used to map IPv4 addresses to hostnames.
name  is the hostname in question.
value  is the IP address of the hostname.
Example: educative.io. 299 IN A 104.20.7.183  where 299 is the
TTL, educative.io is the name, A  is the type, and 104.20.7.183  is the
value.
C
i
l
Canonical name
Type CNAME  records are records of alias hostnames against actual
hostnames. For example if, ibm.com  is really servereast.backup2.com ,
then the latter is the canonical name of ibm.com .
name  is the alias name for the real or ‘canonical’ name of the server.
value  is the canonical name of the server.
Example: bar.example.com. CNAME foo.example.com.
Mail Exchanger
We have seen this one before! Type MX  records are records of the
server that accepts email on behalf of a certain domain.
The name  is the name of the host.
value  is the name of the mail server associated with the host.
Example: educative.io mail exchanger = 10 aspmx2.googlemail.com.
These resource records are stored in text form in special files called zone
files.
DNS Messages #
There are a few kinds of DNS messages, out of which the most common are
query and reply, and both have the same format. Study the following slides
for a detailed overview of a DNS message.
Identification
Flags
Number of RRs
Number of questions
Number of authority RRs
Number of additional RRs
Questions
(variable number of questions)
Answers
(variable number of resource records)
Authority
(variable number of resource records)
Additional Information
(variable number of resource records)
Here is a generic DNS message
1 of 10
There are also zone transfer request and response. But, those are not used
by common clients. Backup or secondary DNS servers use them for zone
transfers, which are when zone files are copied from one server to another.
This takes place over TCP.
1
Which of the following are valid DNS record entry types?
A) A
B) M

---PAGE 16---
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
B) M
C) CNAME
D) A and C
E) A and B
In the next lesson, we’ll use command-line tools to look at DNS response
messages and resource records!
Exercise: Looking At DNS Response Messages and
Resource Records
In this lesson, we'll use command-line tools to look at DNS response messages and
resource records!
We'll cover the following
• Revisiting Nslookup
• Output
• Looking At Real DNS Response Messages With dig
Revisiting Nslookup #
1
nslookup -type=A educative.io
nslookup  is a versatile tool for DNS lookups. The type  flag determines the
type of RR that you want to look into!
Output #
nslookup  can be used to look at DNS records. In this example, we looked up
educative.io .
Here’s what the output may look like:
Server:     169.254.169.254
Address:    169.254.169.254#53
 
Non-authoritative answer:
Name:   educative.io
Address: 104.20.7.183
N
d
ti
i
Name:   educative.io
Address: 104.20.6.183
The first two lines are the IP address of the local DNS server which is
169.254.169.254  in our case.
The last few lines return the type A RR that maps educative.io  to the IP
address 104.20.6.183 . It says ‘non-authoritative’ because the answer is
coming from a local DNS server’s cache, and not from Educative’s
authoritative DNS server.
If you’re wondering what TTL  values look like, run the following command.
The value in the TTL  field is in seconds, so a value of 279 is 4 minutes and 39
seconds.
1
nslookup -debug educative.io
Looking At Real DNS Response Messages With
dig #
dig educative.io
dig  is a command-line tool used to query DNS servers. dig  stands for domain
information groper, and it displays the actual messages that were received
from DNS servers. You can decipher the output for yourself now that you
know what a DNS message looks like.
As always, we encourage you to read the dig manpage and explore the
command for yourself!
We have now studied the Internet’s directory in detail. Let’s move on to
another protocol. See you in the next lesson!

---PAGE 17---
BitTorrent
BitTorrent is a key protocol and has millions of users simultaneously and actively sharing
and downloading hundreds of thousands of }les of all types: music, movies, books, and
so on.
We'll cover the following
• Overview of BitTorrent
• How It Works
• Trackers and torrent }les
• A Simpli}ed BitTorrent Session
• Swarming
• Tit-for-tat
We have already had an overview of what the Peer-to-peer and Hybrid
architectures are. BitTorrent falls more in the hybrid category than pure P2P.
Here it is on a spectrum of decentralization:
Client/Server
Hybrid
Peer-to-peer
Centralized
Partly Centralized
Decentralized
HTTP
BitTorrent
Gnutella
On a spectrum of decentralization, BitTorrent falls in the middle.
Overview of BitTorrent #
Overview of BitTorrent #
BitTorrent is a protocol for peer-to-peer file sharing. A BitTorrent Client is an
application that uses this protocol.
Since BitTorrent is based on a hybrid architecture, it retains some centralized
components.
For example, a central controller that maintains a list of participating
nodes is involved.
But the centralized component is not involved in resource-intensive
operations. So there will never be too much load on it.
Data is instead downloaded or uploaded directly to and by peers.
The file is first supplied to a peer in pieces called chunks, and then they
also distribute the file to other peers.
This is sometimes called a peer-assisted system.
How It Works #
Trackers and torrent }les #
How do clients find peers to connect to? Well, clients connect to a special
tracker node first. The tracker responds with the IP and the port of a few other
peers who are downloading the same file.
📝 Note: Modern BitTorrent clients are trackerless and use a
Distributed Hash Table instead, but that’s beyond the scope of this
course.
So clients can find peers through trackers. But how do clients find the tracker
in the first place? Clients begin by downloading a ‘torrent file’ from a web
server which has the URL of the tracker. The torrent file also contains a SHA1
hash of each file chunk. Can you guess why?
A Simpli}ed BitTorrent Session #
1. Download the ‘torrent file’ from a web server.
1. Download the torrent file  from a web server.
2. Connect to the tracker and get a list of peers.
3. Connect to the peers - initially as a ‘leecher.’
4. While the file is not yet fully downloaded:
Advertise to peers which blocks are available locally.
Request blocks from peers.
Compare hash of downloaded blocks to the hash in the torrent file.
Can you guess why?
5. Turn into a ‘seeder,’ i.e., continue uploading to peers without
downloading.
Swarming #
Study the following animation to get an idea of how a file is distributed in
chunks. Note that it starts with one peer that has the file in its entirety and
then the peers start distributing the file to each other.
CC BY-SA 3.0 via Wikimedia Commons
Once a peer has the entire file it can choose to leave (selfishly) or choose to
stay as a seeder.
The distinct chunks of the file are represented by different colors in the
diagram above, as are the bits being transferred. The initial blank gray boxes
represent that none of the machines has any bit of the file. Eventually, all the
machines have the entire file.
So what this protocol needs really is to give peers the incentive to upload. That
is where the tit-for-tat scheme comes in.
Tit-for-tat #
Every ten seconds, a peer in the network will calculate which four peers
are supplying data at the highest rate to it. It will then supply data to
them in return. These 4 peers are said to be unchoked in the sense that
they are now receiving data in return.
📝 Note: This list of top four peers may change every 10 seconds.
A peer in the network will randomly pick another peer every thirty
seconds and supply data to them. The best-case scenario would be that
the peer becomes one of the randomly picked peer’s top 4 suppliers.
Naturally, that random peer would start supplying data in return. Then if
the randomly picked peer is sending data at a fast enough rate, it may
also become part of the peer’s top four suppliers. In other words, two
peers partnered randomly will continue working with each other if they
are satisfied with the trading. This randomly picked partner is said to be
optimistically unchoked.
The result of this scheme is that everyone has an incentive to upload. The
scheme is an instance of an old successful idea that stems from Axelrod’s
tournament.
Quiz on BitTorrent
1
What category does BitTorrent fall in?
A) Cleint/Server
B) Hybrid

---PAGE 18---
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
C) Peer-to-peer
That concludes our study of application layer protocols! Let’s move on to the
next layer at last.
What Is the Transport Layer?
We }nished the application layer, and now we'll study the transport layer.
We'll cover the following
• You Are Here!
• Key Responsibilities of the Transport Layer
• The Post Analogy
• Where It Exists
• Transport Layer Protocols
• Quick Quiz!
You Are Here! #
Let’s zoom out and have a look at the big picture.
Application
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
you
are
here
Key Responsibilities of the Transport Layer #
Extends network to the applications: the transport layer takes
messages from the network to applications. In other words, while the
network layer (directly below the transport layer) transports messages
from one end-system to another, the transport layer delivers the message
to and from the relevant application on an end-system.
The Post Analogy #
The Post Analogy #
Imagine you post a package across the world. Presumably, a ship or an
airplane would carry the message to the relevant country. However, the post
system of that country would take it to the relevant address. The plane/ship is
the network layer and the post system is the transport layer.
Have a look at the slides for a clearer explanation.
Host 1
Host 2
suppose two end-systems are communicating with each other on Skype via the internet
1 of 4
Here are some other responsibilities of the transport layer.
Logical application-to-application delivery, the transport layer makes
it so that applications can address other applications on other endsystems directly. This is true even if it exists halfway across the world. So
it provides a layer of abstraction.
Segments data. The transport layer also divides the data into
manageable pieces called ‘segments’ or ‘datagrams.’
Can allow multiple conversations. Tracks each application to
application connection or ‘conversation’ separately, which can allow
multiple conversations to occur at once.
Multiplexes & demultiplexes data. It ensures that the data reaches the
relevant application within an end-system. So if multiple packets get sent
to one host, each will end up at the correct application.
Where It Exists #
The transport layer does not have anything to do with the core of the
network. Its only responsibility is to take messages from an application
on a machine and hand them off to the network layer. The network layer
transfers messages from one host to another.
The transport layer also receives messages from the network layer and
transports them to the correct application.
Therefore, the transport layer and its protocols reside on end-systems! It is
also the first layer in the OSI reference model (from the bottom) that
distinguishes between applications.
Transport Layer Protocols #
The transport layer has two prominent protocols: the transmission control
protocol and the user datagram protocol. In general, an application
developer will have to choose between the two. We’ll discuss the intricacies of
each in detail in upcoming chapters, but here is a quick overview.
TCP
Delivers messages that we call
‘segments’ reliably and in order.
Detects any modifications that
may have been introduced in the
packets during delivery and
corrects them.
Handles the volumes of traffic at
one time within the network
core by sending only an
appropriate amount of data at
one time.
Examples of
applications/application
protocols that use TCP are: HTTP,
UDP
Does not ensure in-order
delivery of messages that we call
‘datagrams.’
Detects any modifications that
may have been introduced in the
packets during delivery but does
not correct them by default.
Does not ensure reliable
delivery.
Generally faster than TCP
because of the reduced overhead
of ensuring uncorrupted
delivery of packets in order.

---PAGE 19---
p
E-mail, File Transfers.
Applications that use UDP
include: Domain Name System
(DNS), live video streaming, and
Voice over IP (VoIP).
Quick Quiz! #
1
The transport layer in the OSI reference model uses the services of
______ layer.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) Data link
B) Session
C) Network
In the next lesson, we’ll have a more in-depth look at multiplexing and
demultiplexing!
Multiplexing and Demultiplexing
Let's discuss how the transport layer handles so many simultaneous connections over
one network!
We'll cover the following
• What are Multiplexing & Demultiplexing?
• What is Demultiplexing?
• What is Multiplexing?
• How Do They Work in the Transport Layer?
• Quick Quiz!
What are Multiplexing & Demultiplexing? #
End-systems typically run a variety of applications at the same time. For
example, at any given time a browser, a music streaming service, and an
email agent could be running.
So how does the end-system know which process to deliver packets to? Well,
that’s where the transport layer’s demultiplexing comes in.
What is Demultiplexing? #
Demultiplexing is the process of delivering the correct packets to the correct
applications from one stream.
Here’s a useful analogy: deciphering the mail that should be delivered to
which houses after a large shipment of packages are received at a post office.
Application
Transport
Network
Link
Physical
Data
as bits
End systems run many programs at once which leaves us with the question: what process to deliver which packet to?
What is Multiplexing? #
Also, multiplexing allows messages to be sent to more than one destination
host via a single medium.
An analogy would be when several packages to several different locations are
mailed out from one house.
Application
Transport
Network
Link
Physical
Data as 
bits
End systems can be talking to many other applications at once which leaves us with the question: how to send
messages such that they arrive to the correct process?
Multiplexing and demultiplexing are usually a concern when one protocol
(TCP for example) is used by many others (HTTP, SMTP, FTP) in an upper layer.
Here’s a simplified view of what multiplexing and demultiplexing are.
Application 1
Application 2
Application 3
Application n
.
.
.
Transport Layer
Multiplexing
 
Applications sending messages to several other applications through
one stream made possible through transport layer multiplexing  
Multiplexing
1 of 5

---PAGE 20---
o  5
How Do They Work in the Transport Layer? #
Recall that sockets are gateways between applications and the network, i.e., if
an application wants to send something over to the network, it will write the
message to its socket.
Sockets have an associated port number with them. We looked at ports
briefly in a previous lesson, but here’s a quick overview
Port numbers are 16-bit long and range from 0 and 65,535.
The first 1023 ports are reserved for certain applications and are called
well-known ports. For example, port 80 is reserved for HTTP.
The transport layer labels packets with the port number of the application a
message is from and the one it is addressed to. This is what allows the layer to
multiplex and demultiplex data.
Quick Quiz! #
Q
The transport layer in the TCP/IP reference model uses ______ to
multiplex/demultiplex messages for different applications.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 1
A) IP address
B) Port number
C) Application names
Let’s look at connectionless multiplexing and demultiplexing in the next
lesson!
Multiplexing & Demultiplexing in UDP
Connectionless refers to multiplexing and demultiplexing with UDP. Let's dive right in.
We'll cover the following
• Ports
• Multiplexing & Demultiplexing in UDP
• On Port Assignment in UDP
• Quick Quiz!
Ports #
Here’s a quick refresher on what ports are because that needs to be crystal
clear in order for you to understand multiplexing and demultiplexing.
Sockets, which are gateways to applications, are identified by a
combination of an IP address and a 16-bit port number. That means 
2
= 65536 port numbers exist. However, they start from port 0 so they
exist in the range of 0 −65535.
16
Socket
Port Number = 2331
Sockets have associated port numbers!
Out of these, the port numbers 0 −1023 are well-known and are
reserved for certain standard protocols. Port 80, for instance, is reserved
for HTTP whereas port 22 is reserved for SSH.
Refer to page 16 of RFC 1700 for more details regarding what port
number is assigned to what protocol.
Multiplexing & Demultiplexing in UDP #
When a datagram is sent out from an application, the port number of the
associated source and destination application is appended to it in the
UDP protocol header.
When the datagram is received at the receiving host, it sends the
datagram off to the relevant application’s socket based on destination
port number.
If the source port and source IP address of two datagrams are different
but the destination port and IP address are the same, the datagrams will
still get sent to the same application.
Here are some slides to give you a quick overview of what happens.
 
An application produces data  
Sender
Receiver
Internet
Src Application
1 of 6
On Port Assignment in UDP #
It’s far more common to let the port on the client-side of an application be
i
d d
i
ll
i
d
f h
i
i
l
Thi i b
f

---PAGE 21---
assigned dynamically instead of choosing a particular port. This is because for
communication, both parties must be able to identify each other. Since the
client initiates communication to the server, it must know the port number of
the application on the server. However, the server doesn’t need to know the
client application’s port number in advance. When the first datagram from
the client reaches the server, it will carry the client port number, which the
server can use to send datagrams back to the client.
However, server-side applications generally do not use dynamically allocated
ports! This is because they are running well-known protocols like HTTP and
need to be bound to specific ports.
Quick Quiz! #
1
Ports 0 - 1023 are termed as ephemeral ports.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
A) True
B) False
Let’s look at the principles of reliable data transfer in the next lesson. This is
key to building a good foundation for later lesson on TCP!