# Extracted: Network 3.pdf (24 pages)


---PAGE 1---
Introduction to Congestion Control
In this lesson, we'll look at congestion control!
We'll cover the following
• Bandwidth Allocation Principles
• Should Allocation Be on a per Host or per Connection Basis?
• Ef}ciency & Power
• Bursts of Traf}c
• Transmission Threshold
• Quick Quiz!
What Is Congestion?
When more packets than the network has bandwidth
for are sent through, some of them start getting
dropped and others get delayed. This phenomenon
leads to an overall drop in performance and is called
congestion.
This is analogous to vehicle traffic congestion when
too many vehicles drive on the same road at the
same time. This slows the overall traffic down.
How Do We Fix It?
Congestion physically occurs at the network layer
(i.e. in routers), however it’s mainly caused by the
transport layer sending too much data at once. That
means it will have to be dealt with or ‘controlled’ at
the transport layer as well.
Traf}c congestion at Times
Square, NYC.
📝 Note Congestion control also occurs in the network layer, but we’re
skipping over that detail for now since the focus of this chapter is the
transport layer. So congestion control with TCP is end-to-end; it exists on
the end-systems and not the network. Also note that in this lesson, the
term delay means end-to-end message delay.
Congestion control is really just congestion avoidance. Here’s how the
transport layer controls congestion:
1. It sends packets at a slower rate in response to congestion,
2. The ‘slower rate’ is still fast enough to make efficient use of the available
capacity,
3. Changes in the traffic are also kept track of.
Congestion control algorithms are based on these general ideas and are built
into transport layer protocols like TCP. Let’s also look at a few principles of
bandwidth allocation before moving on.
Bandwidth Allocation Principles #
Should Allocation Be on a per Host or per Connection Basis?
#
Before we get into the key principles of bandwidth allocation, we have to
answer the question: should bandwidth be allocated to each host or to each
connection made by a host?
Not all hosts are created equal; Some can send and receive at a higher data
rate than others. Furthermore, if the bottleneck bandwidth was allocated
equally to all hosts, some of them wouldn’t be able to use the bandwidth to its
full capacity and some wouldn’t have enough. For example, if an Internetenabled doorbell and a busy server had the same bandwidth, the doorbell
would have too much and the server would likely not have enough.
The per-connection allocation, on the other hand, can be exploited by hosts
opening multiple connections to the same end-system.
Usually, bandwidth is allocated per connection.
Ef}ciency & Power #
Bursts of Traf}c #
Suppose 4 end-systems are to use a link with a bandwidth of 200 Mbps. It may
seem that in order to make the most efficient use of this link, the bandwidth
should be divided equally i.e., 
= 50 Mbps should be allocated to each
host. However, in a real setting, each end-system would be able to use less
than the anticipated 50 while avoiding congestion. Why? Because real traffic
is transmitted in bursts and not in one continuous stream. Have a look at the
following plot of a Wireshark traffic capture for a clearer picture.
4
200
Plot of a Wireshark traf}c capture depicting three prominent bursts of traf}c
Simultaneous bursts of traffic from all end-systems can cause more than the
allocated bandwidth to be used which results in congestion and a consequent
drop in performance.
Therefore, bandwidth cannot be divided and allocated equally amongst
end-systems!
Transmission Threshold #
The graph below depicts the effect of an increase in transmission rate on
‘useful traffic’ (traffic that is actually received by the receiver). The number of
packets received by the receiver drastically drop past a certain threshold of
the transmission rate despite the fact that the threshold is less than the
capacity.
Transmission Rate (packets/sec)
Rate of ActualTransmision (packets/sec)
Onset of
congestion
Capacity
The effect of the increase in transmission rate on useful traf}c
The following graph shows that the end-to-end delay in the delivery of the
packets increases exponentially when the packet transmission rate increases
beyond a certain threshold. Furthermore, the delay can never be infinite, so
the packets are simply dropped instead after a certain point.
Transmission Rate (packets/sec)
Delay (seconds)
Onset of
congestion
Capacity
The effect of the increase in transmission rate on delay
📝 Note: congestion collapse occurs when all end-systems are sending
a lot of traffic but nothing is being received, for example, when all or
most packets are dropped. There a few causes for this, including but not
limited to Spurious retransmissions. Spurious retransmissions occur

---PAGE 2---
when a retransmission timer times out for packets that are not lost but
have not yet reached the destination. So, much of the network’s
bandwidth ends up being consumed by a small number of packets.
To sum up, congestion occurs before the maximum capacity of the network is
reached and congestion collapse occurs as it’s approached.
Lastly, according to Kleinrock’s 1979 paper, the optimal transmission rate is
such that power, given by the following equation, is maximized:
Power = Transmission Rate
Delay
Note that after a certain threshold, increase in transmission rate will cause a
very high increase in delay decreasing the overall power.
Quick Quiz! #
1
If the applications increase sending rate, the throughput ______ at
first, then ______.
A) increases, keeps increasing
B) increases, drops
C) drops, increases
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
D) decreases, keeps decreasing.
We’ve now learned the first principle of congestion control: the entire
bandwidth of a network should not be allocated. Let’s continue with the next
two in the next lesson!
More on Principles of Congestion Control
Let's look at a couple of more key principles that congestion control algorithms adhere to!
We'll cover the following
• Max-min Fairness
• Convergence
• Quick Quiz!
What we know so far is that congestion control schemes must avoid
congestion. In practice, this means that the bottleneck link (the link with the
lowest bandwidth) cannot be overloaded. This means on average, the sum of
the transmission rate allocated to all hosts at any given time should be less
than or equal to the bottleneck link’s bandwidth.
Additionally, the congestion control scheme must be efficient. The bottleneck
link is usually both a shared and an expensive resource. Usually, bottleneck
links are wide-area links that are much more expensive to upgrade than the
local area networks. The congestion control scheme should, therefore, ensure
that such links are efficiently used. Mathematically, the control scheme
should ensure that the sum of the transmission rate allocated to all hosts at
any given time should be approximately equal to the bottleneck link’s
bandwidth.
Max-min Fairness #
Furthermore, the congestion control scheme should be fair. Most congestion
schemes aim at achieving max-min fairness. An allocation of transmission
rates to sources is said to be max-min fair if:
1. No link in the network is congested
2. The rate allocated to a source j cannot be increased without decreasing
the rate allocated to another source i, whose allocation is smaller than
the rate allocated to the source j.
the rate allocated to the source j.
In other words, this principle postulates that increasing the transmission
rate of one end-system necessarily decreases the transmission rate
allocated to another end-system with an equal or smaller allocation.
To visualize the different rate allocations, it’s useful to consider the graph
shown below. Consider hosts A and B that share a bottleneck link.
Congested
Region
Efficiency Line
2 Mbps
2 Mbps
Host B rate
Host A rate
Fairness Line
Fair but not efficient
Fair and efficient
Not fair but efficient
Nor fair nor efficient
Possible allocated transmission rates
In this graph, we plot the rate allocated to host B on the x-axis and we plot
the rate allocated to host A on the y-axis . A point in the graph (r , r )
corresponds to a possible allocation of the transmission rates. Since there is a 
2 Mbps bottleneck link in this network, the graph can be divided into
regions:
1. The white-colored part of the graph contains all allocations (r , r ) such
that the bottleneck link is not congested (r + r
< 2).
2. The right border of this region is the efficiency line or the set of
allocations that completely utilize the bottleneck link (r + r
= 2).
3. Finally, the fairness line is the set of fair allocations.
B
A
B
A
A
B
A
B

---PAGE 3---
Depending on the network, a max-min fair allocation may not always exist. In
practice, max-min fairness is an ideal objective that cannot necessarily be
achieved. When there is a single bottleneck link as in the example above,
max-min fairness implies that each source should be allocated the same
transmission rate.
Ideally, the allocation should be both fair and efficient. Unfortunately,
maintaining such an allocation with fluctuations in the number of flows that
use the network is a challenging problem. Furthermore, there might be
several thousands of TCP connections or more that pass through the same
link.
Convergence #
Additionally, bandwidth should be allocated such that it converges to a fair (a
host does not hog all of it), and efficient value. This means it should not
oscillate and most of it will be used. Furthermore, it should also change in
response to changes in the demands of the network over time. Here are some
slides that demonstrate this convergence.
100
0
50
Bandwidth Allocated (percentage)
Time (sec)
Flow #1
Flow #2
Flow #3
2
4
8
12
6
10
0
Flow #1 starts and continues for 2 seconds. Flow #1 is using all of the bandwidth.
1 of 7
📝 Note These values (for example, ‘half’ the bandwidth) are just for
demonstration purposes. In real life, as discussed previously, all of the
available bandwidth can never be used. Furthermore, bandwidth
allocation works based on a protocol in the network layer which we will
discuss in the next chapter. Let’s just assume that this is how it works for
now
Quick Quiz! #
1
In the context of congestion control, an efficient rate allocation is
desirable because ______.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
A) Regulators mandate it
B) It uses network resources efficiently
C) It’s also fair
We now understand some basics of congestion control and bandwidth
allocation. Now that we have an in-depth understanding of how UDP works,
let’s move on to perhaps one of the most important protocols of this entire
course: TCP.
Principles of Reliable Data Transfer
We'll cover the following
• Network Layer Imperfections
• Checksums
• Retransmission Timers
• Limitations of Retransmission Timers
• Sequence Numbers
• Quick Quiz!
Network Layer Imperfections #
The transport layer must deal with the imperfections of the network layer
service. There are three types of imperfections that must be considered by the
transport layer:
1. Segments can be corrupted by transmission errors
2. Segments can be lost
3. Segments can be reordered or duplicated
Let’s look at some workarounds for these problems that the transport layer
employs.
Checksums #
The first imperfection of the network layer is that segments may be
corrupted by transmission errors. The simplest error detection scheme is
the checksum.
A checksum can be based on a number of schemes. One possible scheme is an
arithmetic sum of all the bytes of a segment. Checksums are computed by the
sender and attached with the segment. The receiver verifies it upon reception
d
h
h
d
i
i i
lid Q i
f
h
and can choose what to do in case it is not valid. Quite often, the segments
received with an invalid checksum are discarded.
Data
checksum
Calculates
checksum and
appends to data
Calculates checksum from received
message and compares against
appended checksum. If they are
equal, the data is okay. Otherwise,
the entity knows that it is corrupted
Retransmission Timers #
The second imperfection of the network layer is that segments may be lost.
Since the receiver sends an acknowledgment segment after having received
each data segment, the simplest solution to deal with losses is to use a
retransmission timer.
A retransmission timer starts when the sender sends a segment. The value of
this retransmission timer should be greater than the round-trip-time, for
example, the delay between the transmission of a data segment and the
reception of the corresponding acknowledgment. Note that TCP sends an
acknowledgment for almost every segment! We’ll look at this in more detail in
later lessons. When the retransmission timer expires, the sender assumes that
the data segment has been lost and retransmits it.
This is illustrated in the figure below:

---PAGE 4---
A
B
send segment 1
Using retransmission timers to recover from segment losses
1 of 7
Limitations of Retransmission Timers #
Unfortunately, retransmission timers alone are not sufficient to recover from
segment losses. Let us consider the situation depicted below where an
acknowledgment is lost. In this case, the sender retransmits a data segment
that has been received correctly, but not properly acknowledged.
Unfortunately, as illustrated in the figure below, the receiver considers the
retransmission as a new segment effectively and the segment is duplicated.
A
B
send segment 1
Using retransmission timers to recover from segment losses
1 of 7
Sequence Numbers #
To identify duplicates, transport protocols associate an identification number
with each segment called the sequence number. This sequence number is
prepended to the segments and sent. This way, the end entity can identify
duplicates.
Quick Quiz! #
1
Checksums address which imperfection of the network layer?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 5
A) Packet drops
B) Packet errors
C) Packet reordering
Let’s continue our discussion of reliable transfer data in the next lesson!
Reliable Data Transfer: Sliding Window
In this lesson, we'll study sliding windows
We'll cover the following
• Pipelining
• Sliding Window
• Quick Quiz!
Pipelining #
Applications may generate data at a rate much higher than the network can
transport it. Processor speed is generally much higher than the speed of
writing out and reading data to/from the network (I/O).
Furthermore, reliable message communication is a multi-step process:
1. The processor emits the message to be sent, the network carries the
message to the destination.
2. The receiver processor receives and emits an acknowledgment message.
3. The network carries the acknowledgment to the sender. So, instead of
waiting for an acknowledgment of every packet before transmitting the
next one, it’s more efficient to pipeline the multi-step process. In other
words, instead of waiting for the acknowledgment of a message before
transmitting the next one, the sender keeps transmitting messages
without waiting for an acknowledgment. This makes more efficient use of
the processor’s time.
While pipelining allows the sender to transmit segments at a higher rate, it
may cause the receiver to become overloaded because the receiver may be
running on a slower machine than the sender, or the receiving machine may
be busy executing other processes.

---PAGE 5---
📝 Note: “stop and wait” is the term used in literature for when the
sending entity waits for the acknowledgment of every transmitted
message before sending the next one. That is also a means to recover
from lost messages. It retransmits.
Sliding Window #
The sliding window is the set of consecutive sequence numbers that the
sender can use when transmitting segments without being forced to wait for
an acknowledgment. At the beginning of a session, the sender and receiver
agree on a sliding window size.
The figure below illustrates the operation of the sliding window. The sliding
window shown contains three segments. The sender can thus transmit three
segments before being forced to wait for an acknowledgment. The sliding
window moves to the higher sequence numbers upon reception of
acknowledgments. When the first acknowledgment (of segment 0) is received,
it allows the sender to move its sliding window to the right, and sequence
number 3 becomes available.
In practice, as the segment header encodes the sequence number in a n bits
string, only the sequence numbers between 0 and 2  − 1 can be used. There’s
a problem here. What happens when an application has transmitted 2 −1
messages and still has more data to send? Well, the same sequence number
can be used for different segments and that the sliding window can wrap. This
is illustrated in the figure below assuming that 2 bits are used to encode the
sequence number in the segment header. Note that upon reception of the
acknowledgment for the first segment, the sender slides its window and can
use sequence number 0 again.
n
n
3
A
B
0
1
2
Sending Window
Unsent
Unacknowledged
Acknowledged
A sending sliding window of size 3 is initiated
The sliding window
1 of 11
Unfortunately, segment losses do not disappear because a transport protocol is
using a sliding window. To recover from segment losses, a sliding window
protocol must define:
A heuristic to detect segment losses.
A retransmission strategy to retransmit the lost segments.
Quick Quiz! #
1
Pipelining and congestion control are competing objectives.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) True
B) False
Let’s look at both in the next lesson.
Reliable Data Transfer: Go-back-n
In this lesson, we'll study go-back-n: a simple protocol to ensure detection and
retransmission of lost packets.
We'll cover the following
• Go-back-n
• Go-back-n Receiver
• Cumulative Acknowledgements
• Go-back-n Sender
• Retransmission Timer
• Advantages of Go-back-n
• Selective Repeat
• Comparing to go-back-n
• Quick Quiz!
In the last lesson, we discovered that a sending sliding window alone is not
enough to ensure detection and retransmission of lost packets. In order to
do that, we will look at two protocols:
1. Go-back-n
2. Selective Repeat
Go-back-n #
The simplest sliding window protocol uses go-back-n recovery.
Go-back-n Receiver #
Intuitively, go-back-n receiver operates as follows:
1. It only accepts the segments that arrive in-sequence.
2. It discards any out-of-sequence segment that it receives.
3. When it receives a data segment, it always returns an acknowledgment

---PAGE 6---
g
,
y
g
containing the sequence number of the last in-sequence segment that it
has received.
Cumulative Acknowledgements #
This acknowledgment is said to be cumulative. When a go-back-receiver
sends an acknowledgment for sequence number x, it implicitly acknowledges
the reception of all segments whose sequence number is smaller than or equal
to x.
A key advantage of these cumulative acknowledgments is that it’s easy to
recover from the loss of an acknowledgment.
Consider for example a go-back-n receiver that received segments 1, 2 and 3.
1. It sent acknowledgments for all three segments.
2. Unfortunately, acknowledgments of the first two were lost.
3. Thanks to the cumulative acknowledgments, the receiver receives the
acknowledgment for the last segment and so it knows that all three have
been correctly received.
go-back-n sender
go-back-n receiver
1
The sender transmits 3 segments
Go-back-n cumulative acknowledgements
1 of 7
Go-back-n Sender #
A go-back-n sender uses a sending buffer that can store an entire sliding
window of segments.
The segments are sent with a sending sliding window that we looked at in
the last lesson.
The sender must wait for an acknowledgment once its sending buffer is
full.
When a go-back-n sender receives an acknowledgment, it removes all the
acknowledged segments from the sending buffer.
Retransmission Timer #
A go-back-n sender uses a retransmission timer to detect segment losses. It
maintains one retransmission timer per connection. Here’s how it works:
1. This timer is started when the first segment is sent.
2. When the go-back-n sender receives an acknowledgment, it restarts the
retransmission timer, but only if any unacknowledged segments exist in
its sending window.
3. When the retransmission timer expires, the go-back-n sender assumes
that all of the unacknowledged segments currently stored in its sending
buffer have been lost. It thus retransmits all the unacknowledged
segments in the buffer and restarts its retransmission timer.
The general operation of go-back-n is illustrated in the figure below.
3
A
B
0
1
2
Sending Window
Unsent
Unacknowledged
Acknowledged
A sending sliding window of size 3 is initiated
Go-back-n: example
1 of 7
Advantages of Go-back-n #
The main advantage of go-back-n is that it can be easily implemented, and it
can also provide good performance when only a few segments are lost. But
when there are many losses, the performance of go-back-n quickly drops for
two reasons:
The go back n receiver does not accept out of sequence segments
The go-back-n receiver does not accept out-of-sequence segments.
The go-back-n sender retransmits all unacknowledged segments once it
has detected a loss.
Since the go-back-n protocol does not accept out of order segments, it can
waste a lot of bandwidth if segments are frequently lost.
The Selective Repeat protocol attempts to remedy this by accepting out of
order packets and only retransmitting packets that are corrupted or lost in the
network.
Selective Repeat #
Uses a sliding window protocol just like go-back-n.
The window size should be less than or equal to half the sequence
numbers available. This avoids packets being identified incorrectly.
Here’s an example: suppose the window size is greater than half the
buffer size.
Segment ‘1’ is lost, hence the receiver expects a segment with
sequence number 1 to be retransmitted.
Meanwhile, the window wraps around back to sequence number ‘1.’
The sender sends a new packet with sequence number 1 and the
receiver perceives it to be the original one that it was expecting.
Senders retransmit unacknowledged packets after a timeout or if a NAK
(negative acknowledgment/not acknowledged) is received.
The receiver acknowledges all correct packets.
The receiver stores correct packets until they can be delivered in order to
the upper application layer.
📝 Note: NAKS Negative acknowledgements can be realized using
positive acknowledgements (ACKs) of the last correctly received
segment!

---PAGE 7---
Comparing to go-back-n #
In comparison to the go-back-n protocol, selective repeat conserves
bandwidth, which is, the rate of data transfer across a path.
Quick Quiz! #
1
A cumulative acknowledgement for sequence number n
acknowledges the receipt of all sequences numbers upto and
including ______.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 5
A) n −1
B) n
In the next lesson, we’ll start with UDP, a transport layer protocol.
The User Datagram Protocol
This lesson gives an introduction to one of the protocols at the heart of the transport
layer: UDP!
We'll cover the following
• What is UDP?
• How It Works
• Structure of A UDP Datagram
• Header
• Data
• Quick Quiz!
What is UDP? #
UDP, or User Datagram Protocol, is a transport layer protocol that works
over the network layer’s famous Internet protocol (which we’ll look at indepth in the next chapter). RFC 768 is the official RFC for UDP.
How It Works #
UDP does not involve any initial handshaking like TCP does, and is hence
called a connectionless protocol. This means that there are no established
‘connections’ between hosts.
UDP prepends the source and destination ports to messages from the
application layer and hands them off to the network layer. The Internet
Protocol of the network layer is a best-effort attempt to deliver the message.
This means that the message-
1. May or may not get delivered.
2. May get delivered with changes in it.
3. May get delivered out of order.
UDP only adds the absolute bare minimum functionality over the network
layer. So it…
Does not ensure that messages get sent.
It does check, however, if a message got ‘corrupted’ yet does not take any
measures to correct the errors by default.
Structure of A UDP Datagram #
Header #
UDP prepends four 2-byte header fields to the data it receives from the
application layer. So in total, a UDP header is 8 bytes long. The fields are:
1. Source port number
2. Destination port number
3. Length of the datagram (header and data in bytes)
4. Checksum to detect if errors have been introduced into the message.
We’ll study this in detail in the next lesson!
Data #
Other than the headers, a UDP datagram contains a body of data which can be
up to 65,527 bytes long. Since the maximum possible length of a UDP
datagram is 65,535 bytes which includes the 8-byte header, we are left with
65,527 bytes available. The nature of the data depends on the overlying
application. So if the application is querying a DNS server, it would contain
bytes of a zone file.
Here’s what a UDP message looks like:
Source Port Number
(2 bytes)
Destination Port
Number
(2 bytes)
Length
(2 bytes)
Checksum
(2 bytes)
Data
A UDP Datagram. The header is a total of 8 bytes or 64 bits long.
Quick Quiz! #
1
An application layer hands down 10 bytes to be sent in a UDP
datagram. The value in the length field in the datagram will be
______.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 4
A) 0x000A
B) 0x0012
C) 0x0018
D) None of the above
Let’s go on to look at how UDP does error detection, why UDP is used, and
what well-known protocols are built on top of it in the next lesson!

---PAGE 8---
UDP Checksum Calculation & Why UDP?
Let's look at how the UDP checksum is calculated in-depth, why UDP would ever get
used, and applications that use UDP.
We'll cover the following
• Checksum Calculation
• What if the checksum }eld gets corrupted?
• Why UDP?
• Well-Known Applications That Use UDP
• Xbox Live
• Name Translation
• Network Management
• Quick Quiz!
UDP detects if any changes were introduced into a message while it traveled
over the network. To do so, it appends a ‘checksum’ to the packet as a field
that can be checked against the message itself to see if it was corrupted. It’s
calculated the same way as in TCP. Here’s a refresher with some extra
information:
Checksum Calculation #
1. The payload and some of the headers (including some IP headers) are all
divided into 16-bit words.
2. These words are then added together, wrapping any overflow around.
3. Lastly, the one’s complement of the resultant sum is taken and appended
to the message as the checksum.
📝 Note Also, note that if a message cannot be perfectly divided into 16-
bit chunks, then the last word is padded to the right with zeros. This is
only for checksum calculation though! The actual message does not have
only for checksum calculation though! The actual message does not have
these zeros.
Here’s a visual of how the checksum for a datagram is calculated:
1110011001100110
0101010101010101
1100010000100010
Assume a message can be divided into these 3 16-bit words
1 of 24
At the receiving end, UDP sums the message in 16-bit words and adds the sum
to the sent checksum. If the result is 1111111111111111, the message was not
corrupted. If the result is otherwise, it was.
What if the checksum }eld gets corrupted? #
If the checksum itself gets corrupted, UDP will assume that the message has an
error.
Why UDP? #
You might be wondering why would anyone use UDP when it has so many
apparent drawbacks and doesn’t really do anything? Well, there are actually a
number of reasons why UDP would be a good choice for certain applications.
1. UDP can be faster. Some applications cannot tolerate the load of the
retransmission mechanism of TCP, the other transport layer protocol.
2. Reliability can be built on top of UDP. TCP ensures that every message is
sent by resending it if necessary. However, this reliability can be built in
the application itself.
3. UDP gives finer control over what message is sent and when it is sent.
This can allow the application developer to decide what messages are
important and which do not need concrete reliability.
4. Going on points 3 and 4, UDP allows custom protocols to be built on
top of it.
In fact, Google’s transport layer protocol, Quick UDP Internet
Connections (QUIC), pronounced quick, is an experimental
transport layer network protocol built on top of UDP and designed
by Google. The overall goal is to reduce latency compared to that of
TCP. It’s used by most connections from the Chrome web browser to
Google’s servers!
5. With the significantly smaller header gives UDP an edge over TCP in
terms of reduced transmission overhead and quicker transmission times.
Well-Known Applications That Use UDP #
Xbox Live #
Xbox live is built on UDP.
Yes, Xbox live runs on UDP!
Name Translation #
Name Translation #
Yes, DNS uses UDP! In the case of failed message delivery, DNS either:
1. Resends the message.
2. Sends the message to some other server.
3. Gives a failure message.
Using UDP instead of TCP makes DNS and consequently, web browsing
significantly faster.
Network Management #
Network management and network monitoring is done using a protocol called
Simple Network Management Protocol and it runs on UDP as well.
Quick Quiz! #
1
An application implements its own mechanisms of checksums and
retransmissions. UDP is the ideal choice of transport layer
protocol for this application.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 4
A) True
B) False
Let’s look at some actual live UDP packets in the next lesson with TCPDUMP!

---PAGE 9---
Exercise: Capturing UDP Packets
We'll now look at a command-line tool that allows us to capture UDP packets.
We'll cover the following
• What is tcpdump ?
• Sample Output
• Counting Packets with -c
• Printing PCAP Files With -r
• Looking at Real UDP Packet Headers
• Try it Yourself!
Let’s get into viewing real packets.
What is tcpdump? #
tcpdump  is a command-line tool that can be used to view packets being sent
and received on a computer. The simplest way to run it is to simply type the
following command into a terminal and hit enter. You can try this on the
terminal provided at the end of this lesson!
tcpdump
Packets will start getting printed rapidly to give a comprehensive view of the
traffic.
Sample Output #
However, some might not find it to be very helpful because it does not allow
for a more zoomed-in and fine-grained dissection of the packets, which is
the main purpose of tcpdump  (it’s technically a packet analyzer). So you might
want to consider using some flags to filter relevant packets out.
... what??
Useful tcpdump Flags
Here are some flags that you might
find useful in your exploration of this
tool. You can find more details about
each on tcpdump’s Manpage
Saving tcpdump  Output to a
File with -w
Instead of having all the output print
to the console, we can save it to view
at a later date or to feed into another
program to analyze.
Let's zoom into the traf}c a bit
tcpdump -w filename.ext
Try using this tool in the following code executable.
tcpdump -w output.pcap # Saving output to a file called 'output.pcap'
The file output.pcap  will have all the packets saved to it. Try running this
command in the terminal below. Note that the process does not exit without a
keyboard interrupt. The next flag will help us stop packet capture in a
predetermined fashion.
📝 Note .pcap files are used to store the packet data of a network.
Packet analysis programs such as Wireshark (think of it like tcpdump
with a GUI) export and import packet captures in pcap files.
Counting Packets with -c  #
This flag makes tcpdump  capture a defined number of packets. Here’s how it’s
used.
tcpdump -w output.pcap -c 10 # Capturing 10 packets
You can’t view the file just yet. Let’s do it next.
Printing PCAP Files With -r  #
Great! Let’s actually read .pcap  files now. Here’s how to do it.
tcpdump -w output.pcap -c 10 # Capturing 10 packets 
tcpdump -r output.pcap # Printing the captured packets in a PCAP file
We’ve gotten pretty far with this. There are plenty of other flags and
arguments you could give to tcpdump  to make it capture packets precisely as
per your requirements.
Looking at Real UDP Packet Headers #
Here’s a script to capture and print one UDP packet.
Note that the code may time out before it actually captures a packet. We
would suggest running this one on the terminal.
tcpdump udp -X -c 1 # Capturing 1 UDP packet
The -X  flag just prints the payload of the packet (the data) in both hex and
ASCII.
Here’s what the output is depicting.
The command that starts tcpdump is on the }rst line
1 of 11
Try it Yourself! #
You can try all the commands in this terminal. Click here to go back
Terminal
Click to Connect...

---PAGE 10---
In the next lesson, we’ll learn about the transmission control protocol!
The Transmission Control Protocol
In this lesson, we'll look at a quick overview of TCP and some famous applications that
use it.
We'll cover the following
• Introduction to TCP
• An Analogy: Talking on a Cell Phone
• What TCP Does
• Well-Known Applications That Use TCP
• File Transfer
• Secure Shell SSH
• Email
• Web Browsing
• Quick Quiz!
Introduction to TCP #
TCP, or the transmission control protocol, is one of the two key protocols of
the transport layer. TCP is what makes most modern applications as enjoyable
and reliable as they are. HTTP’s implementation, for example, would be very
complex, if it weren’t for TCP.
TCP is a robust protocol meant to adapt to a diverse range of network
topologies, bandwidths, delays, message sizes, and other varying factors that
exist in the network layer.
An Analogy: Talking on a Cell Phone #
TCP is a connection-oriented protocol unlike UDP. The connection
orientedness is like a phone call because a connection is established before
communication takes place, and then we hang up. Some scenarios that might
occur on a phone call with a friend are relevant to connection-oriented
occu o
a p o e ca
t
a
e d a e e e a t to co
ect o
o e ted
protocols in the Internet, too. For example,
What if you can’t understand what your friend is saying?
Should you ask them to repeat what they said?
What if you haven’t heard them speak for a while?
Does your friend simply not have anything to say?
Has the phone lost reception and disconnected?
Should you keep talking? If so, for how long?
Should both you and your friend periodically say “mhmm” to
indicate that you are present and listening?
TCP, being THE connection-oriented transport layer protocol for the Internet,
has mechanisms to solves these problems.
What TCP Does #
Here are some key responsibilities of the protocol.
1. Send data at an appropriate transmission rate. It should be a fast enough
rate to make full use of the available capacity but it shouldn’t be so fast as
to cause congestion.
2. Segment data. The application layer sends the transport layer a
continuous and unsegmented stream of data so that there’s no limit to
how much data the application layer can give to the transport layer at
once. Hence, the transport layer divides it into appropriately sized
segments. Note that a segment is a collection of bytes. Furthermore,
when a TCP segment is too big, the network layer may break it into
multiple network layer messages, so the receiving TCP entity would have
to re-assemble the network layer messages.
3. End to end flow control. Flow control means not overwhelming the
receiver. It’s not the same as congestion control. Congestion control tries
not to choke the network. However, if the receiving machine is slow, it
might drown in data even if the network is not choked. Avoiding
drowning the receiver in data is end to end flow control. There is also
hop by hop flow control, which is done at the data link layer.
Application Layer
The application layer sends data in an unfragmented stream
1 of 5
3. Identify and retransmit messages that do not get delivered. The
network layer cannot be relied upon to deliver messages.
4. Identify when messages are received out of order and reassemble
them. The network layer can also not be relied upon to transmit messages
in order.
Well-Known Applications That Use TCP #
File Transfer #
FTP or File Transfer Protocol is built on top of TCP. It uses ports 20 and 21.
When transferring files, we wouldn’t want some bytes of the file completely
missing, or some chunks in the file re-ordered or some byte values changed
during transfer. That’s why TCP is a natural choice for FTP. In other words, it
uses TCP for its reliability, which is a key part of file transfer.

---PAGE 11---
Secure Shell SSH  #
SSH or Secure Shell is a protocol to allow a secure connection to a remote
host over an unsecured network. It’s widely popular and most programmers
use it to date to execute operating system shell commands on remote servers.
The reasons that this application uses TCP is similar to FTP, and that’s reliable
delivery.
Email #
All email protocols, SMTP, IMAP, and POP use TCP to ensure complete and
reliable message delivery similar to the reasons that FTP uses TCP.
Web Browsing #
Web browsing on both HTTP and HTTPS is done on TCP as well for the same
reasons as FTP.
Quick Quiz! #
1
The fact that TCP is connection oriented guarantees in-order
delivery of application messages.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 4
A) True
B) False
Now that we have an overview of what TCP is and what it does, let’s look at
some of its key properties in the next lesson!
Key Features of the Transmission Control Protocol
Here are some key properties of TCP. These are important to know to understand the
design of the protocol.
We'll cover the following
• Connection Oriented
• Full Duplex
• Point-to-point Transmission
Connection Oriented #
TCP itself is connection-oriented and creates a long term connection between
hosts. The connection remains until a certain termination procedure is
followed.
Full Duplex #
Furthermore, TCP is full-duplex, which means that both hosts on a TCP
connection can send messages to each other simultaneously.
A
B
Suppose two hosts are connected to each other over TCP
1 of 12
Point-to-point Transmission #
TCP connections have exactly two endpoints! This means that broadcasting
or multicasting is not possible with TCP.
Error Control
TCP can detect errors in segments and make
corrections to them.
Flow Control
TCP on the sending side controls the amount of data
being sent at once based on the receiver’s specified
capacity to accept and process it. The sender adjusts
the sending rate accordingly.
Congestion Control
As specified in a previous lesson, TCP has in-built
mechanisms to control the amount of congestion on
the network.
TCP detects and handles
errors!
Now we understand what TCP is and its general design principles. Let’s study
TCP headers in the next lesson!

---PAGE 12---
TCP Segment Header
We'll now study TCP headers. They're are far more complex than UDP headers and really
are what allow for TCP to work properly!
We'll cover the following
• Introduction
• Source and Destination Ports
• Sequence Number
• Acknowledgement Number
• Example
• Header Length
• Reserved Field
• Quick Quiz!
Introduction #
TCP headers play a crucial role in the implementation of the protocol. In fact,
TCP segments without actual data and with headers are completely valid.
They’re actually used quite often!
The size of the headers range from 20 - 60 bytes. Let’s discuss the header field
by field.
Source and Destination Ports #
8 flags (8
bits)
Reserved
(4 bits)
Options and Padding (40 bytes)
Source Port Number (2 bytes)
Destination Port Number (2 bytes)
Sequence Number (4 bytes)
Acknowledgment Number (4 bytes)
Header
Length
(4 bits)
Window Size
(2 bytes)
Checksum (2 bytes)
Urgent Pointer (2 bytes)
The source and destination ports are the }rst }elds of the TCP header.
The source and destination port numbers are self-explanatory. They are
exactly like the source and destination ports in UDP. Just for a refresher
though, the source port is the port of the socket of the application that is
sending the segment and the destination port is the port of the socket of the
receiving application. The size of each field is two bytes.
Sequence Number #
8 flags (8
bits)
Header
Length
(4 bits)
Reserved
(4 bits)
Source Port Number (2 bytes)
Destination Port Number (2 bytes)
Sequence Number (4 bytes)
Acknowledgment Number (4 bytes)
Window Size
(2 bytes)
Checksum (2 bytes)
Urgent Pointer (2 bytes)
Options and Padding (40 bytes)
The sequence number is the second }eld of the TCP header. It represents the }rst byte of data in the TCP segment.
Every byte of the TCP segment’s data is labeled with a number called a
sequence number. The sequence number field in the header has the
sequence number of the first byte of data in the segment.
sequence number of the first byte of data in the segment.
Header
42894
42895
42896
42897
42898
42901
42899
42900
42902
42905
42903
42904
42906
42907
42908
The sequence
number of the first
byte of data is sent
in the header
Each byte of a TCP segment is labeled with a sequence number.
📝 Note The initial sequence number is a randomly generated number
between 0 and 2
−1.
Acknowledgement Number #
32
Reserved
(4 bits)
Options and Padding (40 bytes)
Source Port Number (2 bytes)
Destination Port Number (2 bytes)
Sequence Number (4 bytes)
Acknowledgment Number (4 bytes)
Header
Length
(4 bits)
8 flags (8
bits)
Window Size
(2 bytes)
Checksum (2 bytes)
Urgent Pointer (2 bytes)
The third }eld in the TCP header is the acknlowledgement number
The acknowledgment number is a 4-byte field that represents the sequence
number of the next expected segment that the sender will receive.
Example #
So if a segment’s sequence number was 42849 and its data field had 59 bytes
of data, the sequence number of the next expected segment or the
acknowledgment number would be 42908. This helps TCP to identify if a
segment was missing or out of order.
Header Length #
8 flags (8
bits)
Reserved
(4 bits)
Header
Length
(4 bits)
Window Size
(2 bytes)
Source Port Number (2 bytes)
Destination Port Number (2 bytes)
Sequence Number (4 bytes)
Acknowledgment Number (4 bytes)
Checksum (2 bytes)
Urgent Pointer (2 bytes)
Options and Padding (40 bytes)
The length of the TCP header is specified here. This helps the receiving end to
identify where the header ends and the data starts from.
📝 Note The header length is represented by 4 bits, i.e., the numbers 
0000 →1111 or 0 →15 in decimal which is not enough to represent
the potential 60 bytes of the header. Hence, this number is multiplied
by 4 upon receiving. So 1111 would represent 60. In other words, the
way the 4-bit header length field is used to represent a maximum header
length of 60, is that this field represents the number of 4-byte words in
the header
Reserved Field #

---PAGE 13---
8 flags (8
bits)
Window Size
(2 bytes)
Checksum (2 bytes)
Urgent Pointer (2 bytes)
Options and Padding (40 bytes)
Source Port Number (2 bytes)
Destination Port Number (2 bytes)
Sequence Number (4 bytes)
Acknowledgment Number (4 bytes)
Header
Length
(4 bits)
Reserved
(4 bits)
The reserved bits serve as an offset and are left for potential future use
The header has a 4-bit field that is reserved and is always set to 0. This field
aligns the total header size to be in multiples of 4 (as we saw was necessary
for the header length to be processed).
Quick Quiz! #
1
Given an initial sequence number of 255 and 50 bytes sent in a
TCP segment, what will be the value of the sequence number field
in the next TCP packet header?
A) The sequence number of the last byte in the previous
segment i.e., 254
B) The number of bytes in the first segment, i.e., 50
C) The sequence number of the next expected byte to be sent
i.e., 255
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 4
D) The sequence number of the next expected byte to be sent
i.e., 305
We’ll continue dissecting the TCP headers in the next lesson!
TCP Header Flags
In the last lesson, we discussed eight }elds of the TCP header. Let's now discuss the last
few!
We'll cover the following
• Flags
• ACK
• RST
• SYN
• FIN
• TCP Connection Establishment & Termination
• CWR & ECN
• PSH
• URG
• Quick Quiz!
TCP headers have eight 1-bit flags that are imperative to signaling in the
protocol.
8 flags (8
bits)
Window Size
(2 bytes)
Checksum (2 bytes)
Urgent Pointer (2 bytes)
Options and Padding (40 bytes)
Source Port Number (2 bytes)
Destination Port Number (2 bytes)
Sequence Number (4 bytes)
Acknowledgment Number (4 bytes)
Header
Length
(4 bits)
Reserved
(4 bits)
Each 1-bit ~ag is crucial to make the protocol work.
Flags #
Let’s have a quick look at what each flag is meant for.
A
C
K
P
S
H
R
S
T
U
R
G
S
Y
N
F
I
N
C
W
R
E
C
N
The eight ~ags used in TCP headers.
The first four discussed below, namely ACK, RST, SYN, and FIN are used in
the establishment, maintenance, and tear-down of a TCP connection.
ACK #
This flag is set to 1 in a segment to acknowledge a segment that was received
previously. This is an important part of the protocol. In other words, when a
receiver wants to acknowledge some received data, it sends a TCP segment
with the ACK flag and the acknowledgment number field appropriately set.
This flag is also used in connection establishment and termination as we will
see in more detail later.
📝 Note that these acknowledgment messages can and often do contain
data as well!
RST #
The reset flag immediately terminates a connection. This is sent due to the
result of some confusion, such as if the host doesn’t recognize the connection,
if the host has crashed, or if the host refuses an attempt to open a connection.
SYN #
The synchronization flag initiates a connection establishment with a new
host. The details will be covered later in the lesson on connection
establishment.
FIN #

---PAGE 14---
This flag is used to terminate or finish a connection with a host.
TCP Connection Establishment & Termination #
The slides below give a very high level overview of how these flags are used to
establish and terminate a TCP connection.
A
B
SYN
Host A wants to establish a connection with host B and so sends a segment with the SYN ~ag set
1 of 8
The rest of the flags, given below, are not very well-known. However, it
doesn’t hurt to know about them.
CWR & ECN #
These flags, Congestion Window Reduced and Explicit Congestion
Notification are used to handle congestion. To put it very simply, the ECN flag
is set by the receiver, so that the sender knows that congestion is occurring.
The sender sets the CWR flag in response to this so that the receiver knows
that the receiver has reduced its congestion window to compensate for
congestion and the sender is sending data at a slower rate.
PSH #
The default behavior of TCP is in the interest of efficiency; if multiple small
TCP segments were received, the receiving TCP will combine them before
handing them over to the application layer. However, when the Push (PSH)
flag is set, the receiving end immediately flushes the data from its buffer to
the application instead of waiting for the rest of it to arrive.
This is usually used for applications like Telnet, where every keystroke is a
command. It would not make sense to say, buffer 50 keystrokes and send them
to the application layer at once, so, every keystroke is pushed.
A
B
Host A has a buffer for the data it receives from host B
1 of 9
URG #
The Urgent flag marks some data within a message as urgent. Upon receipt of
an urgent segment, the receiving host forwards the urgent data to the
application with an indication that the data is marked as urgent by the sender.
The rest of the data in the segment is processed normally.
This would be used when suppose a large file is being transferred but the
sender realizes that it’s the wrong file and sends a command to stop transfer.
It wouldn’t make sense to have the file finish transferring first, hence the
command to stop transfer is marked as urgent and is executed before the file
i d
f
i
is done transferring.
Quick Quiz! #
1
What functionality does the urgent flag allow that the push flag
does not?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
A) URG is more important and has higher priority
B) URG marks out which part of the data is urgent
C) PSH pushes out data immediately while URG ensures that
it’s sent up to the application immediately only
Let’s finish off looking at the rest of the headers in the next lesson!
TCP Headers: Window Size, Checksum & More
We'll continue our discussion of TCP headers in this lesson
We'll cover the following
• Window Size
• Checksum
• Urgent Pointer
• Options & Padding
• Common Options
• Quick Quiz!
Window Size #
Remember the ‘buffer’ we discussed in the last lesson? Well, the window size
is essentially the amount of available space in that buffer. TCP at the receiving
end buffers incoming data that has not been processed yet by the overlaying
application. The amount of available space in this buffer is specified by the
window size.
6 flags (6
bits)
Window Size
(2 bytes)
Checksum (2 bytes)
Urgent Pointer (2 bytes)
Options and Padding (40 bytes)
Source Port Number (2 bytes)
Destination Port Number (2 bytes)
Sequence Number (4 bytes)
Acknowledgment Number (4 bytes)
Header
Length
(2 bytes)
Reserved
(6 bits)
The window size is a critical element of TCP

---PAGE 15---
The window size can be up to 2 bytes in size hence, the numerical range of
the window size is from 2 →2
−1 or 0 →65535.
The window size is communicated to the sender by the receiver in every TCP
message and gets updated as the buffer fills and empties. If the window size
reduces after a bit, the sender will know that it needs to reduce the amount of
data being sent, or give the receiver time to clear the buffer.
To put it another way, the window size is at first equal to as much data as the
receiving entity is willing and able to receive. As it receives some more data,
the window size will decrease and as it hands over some of the received data
to the application layer, the window size will increase. This is useful to
implement flow control.
0
16
6 flags (6
bits)
Window Size
(2 bytes)
Checksum (2 bytes)
Urgent Pointer (2 bytes)
Options and Padding (40 bytes)
Source Port Number (2 bytes)
Destination Port Number (2 bytes)
Sequence Number (4 bytes)
Acknowledgment Number (4 bytes)
Header
Length
(2 bytes)
Reserved
(6 bits)
The checksum allows TCP to be reliable, and the urgent pointer identi}es the range of bytes in the packet that are
urgent.
Checksum #
The checksum is calculated exactly like in UDP except that the checksum
calculation is mandatory in TCP!
Urgent Pointer #
The urgent pointer defines the byte to the point of which the urgent data
exists. This is because a single segment can contain both parts of urgent and
regular data. This field is only used in conjunction with the urgent flag.
6 flags (6
bits)
Window Size
(2 bytes)
Checksum (2 bytes)
Urgent Pointer (2 bytes)
Options and Padding (40 bytes)
Source Port Number (2 bytes)
Destination Port Number (2 bytes)
Sequence Number (4 bytes)
Acknowledgment Number (4 bytes)
Header
Length
(2 bytes)
Reserved
(6 bits)
The options }eld allows to build in extra functionality that the regular header does not cover
Options & Padding #
The options and padding field provides up to an extra 40 bytes to build extra
facilities that are not covered by the regular header. The options can vary in
length and exist in multiples of 32 bytes using zeros to pad in any extra bits.
Common Options #
Some options are commonly used and are well-defined. Here’s a table that
discusses each.
Option
Explanation
MSS
Defines the maximum-sized payload a
host can handle at one time. Larger
payload sizes are preferable because the
header would be slightly different in
certain fields for each segment. The
redundancy will be significant and
overhead will therefore be high. If this
option is not used, the 536-byte payload is
used as default.
Ti
t
All
d
t ti
t
t
Timestamp
Allows senders to timestamp segments.
This is a logical extension of sequence
numbers. We'll have a closer look at this
one in upcoming lessons!
Window Scale
Allows the host to 'scale up' its window
size by a factor in situations where
sending data to the sender from the
receiver takes longer than sending to the
receiver. This, for example, allows the
sender to keep sending data without
having to wait long periods of time to
hear back for acknowledgments. This
option essentially allows the
communicating parties to use larger than
default buffers - larger by a multiple
factor (power of 2 using shift operations).
So, if the scale factor is 4 and the window
size otherwise specified is 20 kB, the
actual window size is 80 kB.
Quick Quiz! #
1
The window size represents the amount of buffer available at the
receiver. This should be constant and only communicated in the
first TCP segment sent from the receiver to the sender. What do
you think?
A) That is an excellent idea
B) The amount of buffer dynamically changes, so this field is
needed
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
C) This must be due to some politics during TCP
standardization
We’re finally done with the TCP header! Let’s learn more about the protocol
itself starting from the next lesson.

---PAGE 16---
TCP Connection Establishment: Three-way
Handshake
In this lesson, we'll discuss how a TCP connection is established!
We'll cover the following
• Initiating a Connection
• Responding to an Initial Connection Message
• Acknowledging The Response
• Quick Quiz!
A TCP connection is established by using a three-way handshake, which we
briefly touched upon in a previous lesson. The connection establishment
phase uses the sequence number, the acknowledgment number, and the
SYN flag.
Initiating a Connection #
When a client host wants to open a TCP connection with a server host, it
creates and sends a TCP segment with:
The SYN flag set
The sequence number set to a random initial value. So the sequence
numbers do not start with 0! Can you guess why?
Why sequence numbers are set to random values
Responding to an Initial Connection Message #
Upon reception of this segment (which is often called a SYN segment), the
server host replies with a segment containing:
the SYN flag set
the sequence number set to a random number.
The ACK flag set
The acknowledgment number set to the sequence number of the
received SYN segment incremented by 1 mod 2
, because the SYN
segment consumes one byte. This new number may exceed 2
, which is
the limit of the ACK header field, so the modulus by 2
 of this number is
taken. This allows the number to cycle back and start from 0.
📝 Note When a TCP entity sends a segment with x + 1 as the
acknowledgment number, it means that it has received all the segments
up to and including the segments with the sequence number x, and that
it’s expecting data having sequence number x + 1.
This segment is often called a SYN+ACK segment. The acknowledgment
confirms to the client that the server has correctly received the SYN segment.
The random sequence number of the SYN+ACK segment is used by the server
host to verify that the client has received the segment.
Acknowledging The Response #
Upon reception of the SYN+ACK segment, the client host replies with a
segment containing:
The ACK flag set
The acknowledgment number set to the sequence number of the
received SYN+ACK segment incremented by 1. The modulus of the
number by 2
 is obviously taken. At this point, the TCP connection is
open and both the client and the server are allowed to send TCP segments
containing data. This is illustrated in the figure below:
32
32
32
32
Client
Server
Sequence Number
x
Acknowledgment Number 
SYN
ACK
Connection Request
Initiating a Connection
1 of 4
In the figure above, the connection is considered to be established by the
client once it has received the SYN+ACK segment, while the server considers
the connection to be established upon reception of the ACK segment.
Quick Quiz! #
1
A client is establishing a connection with a server. The first
segment sent from the client to the server contains ______ in the
flags field
flags field.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
A) 00 01 00 10
B) 00 00 00 10
C) 00 01 00 00
A server could, of course, refuse to open a TCP connection upon reception of a
SYN segment. This refusal may be due to various reasons. Let’s discuss the
details in the next lesson.

---PAGE 17---
Other TCP Connection Establishment Methods
In this lesson, we'll look at some unconventional ways that connection establishment
may occur.
We'll cover the following
• A TCP Three-way Handshake FSM
• Client-Side
• Server-Side
• Simultaneous Connection Establishment
• Quick Quiz!
In the last lesson, we looked at the most common way that TCP connection
establishment could occur. Now, let’s look at some other ways it can
successfully occur.
A TCP Three-way Handshake FSM #
TCP connection establishment can be described with a four-state Finite State
Machine (FSM) as shown below. In this FSM, X/Y  indicates that segment X
was transmitted and segment Y  was received. Init is the initial state
Init
Established
SYN Sent
SYN RCVD
SYN
ACK
ACK/SYN+ACK
SYN+ACK/SYN
X/Y: X is transmitted &Y is received
Init: initial state
TCP FSM for connection establishment
Client-Side #
Let’s carve out the paths in this FSM. Here’s the three-way handshake path.
1. A client host starts in the Init state.
2. It then sends a SYN segment and enters the SYN Sent state where it waits
for a SYN+ACK segment.
3. When a SYN+ACK is recieved in the SYN SENT state, it replies with an
ACK segment and enters the Established state where data can be
exchanged.
Server-Side #
1. On the other hand, a server host starts in the Init state.
2. When a server process starts to listen to a destination port, the
underlying TCP entity creates a TCP control block and a queue to process
incoming SYN segments. Upon reception of a SYN segment, the server’s
TCP entity replies with a SYN+ACK and enters the SYN RCVD state.
3. It remains in this state until it receives an ACK segment that
acknowledges its SYN+ACK segment, and with this it then enters the
Established state.
Simultaneous Connection Establishment #
Apart from these two paths in the TCP connection establishment, shown in the
above FSM, there is a third way that a connection can be established: when
both the client and the server send a SYN segment to open a TCP connection.
Client
Server
Sequence Number
y
SYN
ACK
Connection Request
Connection Request
Sequence Number
x
SYN
ACK
Simultaneous TCP Connection Opening
1 of 2
Both sides must know the port number for each other in this case. It doesn’t
have to be a well-known port number or the same on both sides.
Quick Quiz! #
1
Simultaneous connection may result in more segments being
exchanged than a regular three-way handshake.
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
A) True
B) False
Coming up, we’ll look at a few scenarios in which connection establishment
can go wrong and how TCP handles it.

---PAGE 18---
When Connection Establishment Fails: Syn Floods &
Retransmission
In this lesson, we'll look at a couple of loopholes in TCP's implementation and how
modern }xes took care of them.
We'll cover the following
• Hosts Can Refuse Connection Requests
• Syn Flood Attacks
• Syn Cookies
• Retransmitting Lost Segments
• Quick Quiz!
Hosts Can Refuse Connection Requests #
A host could refuse to open a TCP connection upon reception of a SYN
segment. This refusal may be due to various reasons, for example:
1. There may be no server process that’s listening on the destination port
of the SYN segment.
2. The server could always refuse connection establishments from a
particular client (e.g., due to security reasons).
3. The server may not have enough resources to accept a new TCP
connection at that time.
There are other scenarios in which a connection may be refused but these are
the common ones. If a process is listening on a port, but the connection is to
be refused, the server sends a SYN segment with the following properties:
Has its RST flag set
Contains the sequence number of the received SYN segment as its
acknowledgment number.
Thi i ill
t
t d i
th
lid
b l
W
ill di
th
th
tili
ti
f
This is illustrated in the slides below. We will discuss the other utilizations of
the TCP RST flag later in the TCP connection release lesson.
Client
Server
Sequence Number
x
Acknowledgment Number 
SYN
ACK
Connection Request
Initiating a Connection
1 of 3
Syn Flood Attacks #
When a TCP entity opens a TCP connection, it creates a Transmission Control
Block (TCB) that contains the entire state of the connection, including the
local sequence number and sequence number sent by the remote client. Until
the mid-1990s, TCP implementations had a limit on the number of ‘half-open’
TCP connections (TCP connections in the SYN RCVD state) which was most
commonly at 100. So a machine could only have a 100 ‘half-open’ TCP
connections. This was meant to avoid overflowing the entity’s memory with
TCBs. When the limit was reached, the TCP entity would stop accepting any
new SYN segments.
📝 Note: The Transmission Control Block: For each established TCP
connection, a TCP implementation must maintain a Transmission
Control Block (TCB). A TCB contains all the information required to send
and receive segments. This includes:
the local IP address
the remote IP address
the local TCP port number
the remote TCP port number
the current state of the TCP FSM
the maximum segment size (MSS)
Here’s an illustration of what should happen.
Client
Server
Assuming that
the TCB limit is 6
Assuming that
the TCB limit is 6
Normal behavior with TCBs
1 of 5
Syn Cookies #
However, this allowed attackers to carry out an attack where they could
render a resource unavailable in the network by sending it valid messages.
Such attacks are called Denial of Service (DoS) attacks because they deny the
user(s) a service. Here’s how this one was carried out:
1. The attacker would send a few 100 SYN segments every second to a
server
2. The attacker would not reply to any received SYN+ACK segments
3. To avoid being caught, the attacker would send these SYN segments with
a different IP address from their own IP address.
4. Once a server entered the SYN RCVD state, it would remain in that state
for several seconds, waiting for an ACK and not accepting any new,
possibly genuine connections, thus being rendered unavailable.
Here are some slides depicting a SYN flood attack:

---PAGE 19---
Client
Server
Connection Request + Create TCB
Assuming that
the TCB limit is 6
Assuming that
the TCB limit is 6
syn ~ood attack
1 of 8
To avoid these SYN flood attacks, newer TCP implementations reply directly
with SYN+ACK segments and wait until the reception of a valid ACK to create a
TCB.
The goal is to not store connection state on the server immediately upon
reception of a SYN packet. But, without this information, the server cannot tell
if a subsequent ACK it receives is from a legitimate client that had sent a
benign SYN packet. One way to do it is to verify that if the acknowledgement
number contained in the ACK packet is y then the server had sent a sequence
number contained in the ACK packet is y, then the server had sent a sequence
number y −1 in the SYN+ACK packet. But, again, if we are remembering the
initial sequence number for each SYN packet, we are back to square one -
remembering connection state. The way SYN Cookie solves this problem is to
use a function that uses some information from the client’s SYN packet and
some information from the server side to calculate a random initial sequence
number. This number, say, y −1 is sent to the client in a SYN + ACK message.
If an ACK packet is later received with a sequence number y, using some
packet header fields and some server side information, a reverse function can
verify that the acknowledgement number is valid. If not, the connection is
refused, otherwise a TCB is created and a connection is established.
The advantage of SYN cookies is that the server would not need to create and
store a TCB upon reception of the SYN segment.
Retransmitting Lost Segments #
Since the underlying Internet protocol provides an unreliable service, the SYN
and SYN+ACK segments sent to open a TCP connection could be lost. Current
TCP implementations start a retransmission timer when the first SYN
segment is sent. This timer is often set to three seconds for the first
retransmission, and then doubles after each retransmission (RFC 2988). When
the timer expires, the segment is retransmitted. TCP implementations also
enforce a maximum number of retransmissions for the initial SYN segment.
Note that the same technique is used for all TCP segments, not just connection
establishment segments.
We’ll look at this in detail when we study TCP reliability in an upcoming
lesson!
Quick Quiz! #
1
A TCP connection establishment request may be refused due to
which of the following reasons?
A) The server already has one other open connection and
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
hence cannot deal with another.
B) The server does not have enough resources to open another
connection.
C) The server has one other half-open connection.
That is it for TCP connection establishment. What we’ll cover next is how TCP
releases a connection.
TCP Connection Release
In this lesson, we'll discuss how TCP terminates established connections.
We'll cover the following
• Abrupt Connection Release
• Graceful Connection Release
• FSM
• Receiving a FIN
• Tracing through the FSM
• Sending a FIN
• Slides of Path 1A
• Quick Quiz!
TCP, like most connection-oriented transport protocols, supports two types of
connection releases:
1. Graceful connection release, where the connection is not closed until
both parties have closed their sides of the connection.
2. Abrupt connection release, where either one user closes both directions
of data transfer or one TCP entity is forced to close the connection.
Abrupt Connection Release #
We’ve already had a brief overview of abrupt connection release with RST
segments in a previous lesson. Let’s have a closer look.
An abrupt release is executed when a RST segment is sent. A RST can be sent
for the following reasons:
A non-SYN segment was received for a non-existing TCP connection
(RFC 793).
Some implementations send a RST segment when a segment with an

---PAGE 20---
Some implementations send a RST segment when a segment with an
invalid header is received on an open connection (RFC 3360). This
causes the corresponding connection to be closed and has prevented
attacks (RFC 4953).
Some implementations send an RST segment when they need to close an
existing TCP connection for any reason such as:
There are not enough resources to support this connection
The remote host has stopped responding and is now unreachable.
When a RST segment is sent by a TCP entity, it should contain the current
value of the sequence number for the connection (or 0 if it does not belong to
any existing connection), and the acknowledgment number should be set to
the next expected in-sequence sequence number on this connection.
Graceful Connection Release #
The normal way of terminating a TCP connection is by using the FIN flag of
the TCP header. This ‘graceful mechanism’ allows each host to release its own
side of the connection individually. The utilization of the FIN flag in the TCP
header consumes one sequence number.
FSM #
The following figure shows an FSM that depicts the various ‘graceful’ ways
that a TCP connection can be released.
Don’t feel overwhelmed if you don’t understand it yet, we’ll study each
possible path individually.
Connection Release FSM
Starting from the Established state, there are two main paths through this
FSM.
Receiving a FIN #
Throughout the rest of this lesson we’ll refer to the two hosts as client and
server. In the case of this path, the client receives a FIN segment. Let’s trace it.
1. The client receives a segment with sequence number x and the FIN flag
set. The utilization of the FIN flag indicates that the byte before sequence
number x was the last byte of the byte stream sent by the server. The FIN
segment is subject to the same retransmission mechanisms as a normal
TCP segment. In particular, its transmission is protected by the
retransmission timer that we’ll look at in the next few lessons.
2. Once all of the data has been delivered to the application layer entity, the
TCP entity sends an ACK segment to acknowledge the FIN segment it
received in step (1), whose acknowledgment number field is set to 
p
g
(x + 1) mod 2
.
3. At this point, the TCP connection enters the CLOSE_WAIT state. In this
state, the client can still send data to the server.
4. Once the client has sent all the data that it was supposed to, it sends a FIN
segment and enters the LAST_ACK state. In this state, the client waits for
the acknowledgment of its FIN segment. It may still retransmit
unacknowledged data segments, e.g. if the retransmission timer expires.
5. Upon reception of the acknowledgment for the FIN segment, the TCP
connection is completely closed and its TCB can be discarded.
Tracing through the FSM #
Here are some slides tracing this path through the FSM.
32
Established
SYN RCVD
FIN Wait1
CLOSE Wait
Fin Wait2
Closing
LAST-ACK
TIME Wait
Closed
FIN
FIN
FIN/ACK
FIN/ACK
ACK
ACK
FIN/ACK
TImeout [2MSL]
FIN
ACK
Starting from an established connection
Connection Release FSM
1 of 6
Sending a FIN #
The second path is when the client decides first to send a FIN segment.
1. Upon sending the FIN, the connection enters the FIN_WAIT1 state. In this
state, the client can retransmit unacknowledged segments, but cannot
send new data segments. There are two paths that this one can split into
after this:
A. The client receives an ACK segment in response to its FIN. The TCP
connection enters the FIN_WAIT2 state in which new data segments
from the server are still accepted until the reception of a FIN
segment. The acknowledgment for this segment is sent once all the
data before the FIN segment has been delivered to the client. After
this, the connection enters the TIME_WAIT state.
B. In the second case, a FIN segment is received from the server. The
connection enters the Closing state once all the data from the server
has been delivered to the client. In this state, no new data segments
can be sent and the client waits for an acknowledgment of its FIN
segment before entering the TIME_WAIT state.
2. A TCP connection enters the TIME_WAIT state after the client sends the
last ACK segment to a server. This segment indicates to the server that all
the data that it’s sent has been correctly received and that it can safely
release the TCP connection and discard the corresponding TCB.
3. The connection remains in the TIME_WAIT state for 2 × a certain length
of time called the maximum segment lifetime (MSL) seconds. The TCP
standard defines MSL as 120 seconds (2 minutes). Although, this value is
flexible in modern implementations. During the 2 ×MSL period, the TCB
of the connection is maintained on both ends to:
allow retransmission of the sent ACK segments if any are lost.
handle duplicate segments on the connection correctly without
causing the transmission of a RST segment
Slides of Path 1A #

---PAGE 21---
Established
SYN RCVD
FIN Wait1
CLOSE Wait
Fin Wait2
Closing
LAST-ACK
TIME Wait
Closed
FIN
FIN
FIN/ACK
FIN/ACK
ACK
ACK
FIN/ACK
TImeout [2MSL]
FIN
ACK
Starting from an established connection
X/Y: X is transmitted & Y is received
Init: initial state
Connection Release FSM
1 of 8
Quick Quiz! #
1
What are some reasons why a connection may get abruptly
terminated?
A) The server has sent all the data that was requested
B) The server does not have enough resources to sustain the
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
) The server does not have enough resources to sustain the
connection
C) The client has received all the data that it needed and the
connection is now redundant
Now that we’re done with what connection release looks like in TCP, let’s move
on to efficient data transmission with TCP using Nagle’s algorithm in the next
lesson!
Efficient data transmission with TCP
In this lesson, we'll study the main data transfer mechanisms used by TCP.
We'll cover the following
• Segment Transmission Strategies
• Nagle’s Algorithm
• Algorithm
• Limitations
• Quick Quiz!
Segment Transmission Strategies #
In a transport protocol such as TCP that offers a byte stream, a practical issue
that was left as an implementation choice in RFC 793 was when a new TCP
segment should be sent.
There are two simple and extreme implementation choices:
1. Send a TCP segment as soon as the application has requested the
transmission of some data.
Advantage: This allows TCP to provide a low delay service.
Disadvantage: If the application is writing data one byte at a time,
TCP would place each byte in a segment containing 20 bytes of the
TCP header. This is a huge overhead that is not acceptable in wide
area networks.
2. Transmit a new TCP segment once the application has produced MSS
bytes of data. Recall MSS from this lesson on TCP Headers.
Advantage: Reduced overhead
Disadvantage: Potentially at the cost of a very high delay, which
may be unacceptable for interactive applications.
Nagle’s Algorithm #
g
g
An elegant solution to this problem was proposed by John Nagle in RFC 896
called Nagle’s Algorithm.
In essence, as long as there are unacknowledged packets, Nagle’s algorithm
keeps collecting application layer data up to maximum segment size, to be
sent together in a single packet. This helps reduce the packetization overhead
by reducing small packets.
Algorithm #
if window size >= MSS and available data >= MSS:
    send one MSS-sized segment
else:
    if there is unacknowledged data:
        place data in buffer until acknowledgement is received 
    else:
        send one TCP segment containing all buffered data
Nagle's Algorithm
The algorithm takes up 2-3 lines in a TCP implementation. Nagle’s algorithm
‘executes’ every time new data comes in from the remote host. Here’s how it
works: it sends data if it is at least the size of one MSS and the window size is
appropriate. Otherwise, it checks if any unacknowledged segments exist. If so,
it buffers the data and doesn’t send it. There is no timer on this condition,
and it will keep buffering data until previous segments are acknowledged. If
an ACK segment comes in, it sends the data.
Limitations #
Nagle’s has a few limitations:
1. Nagle’s algorithm is only supported by TCP and no other protocols like
UDP.
2. TCP applications that require low latency and fast response times such
as internet phone calls or real-time online video games, do not work well
when Nagle’s is enabled. The delay caused by the algorithm triggers a
noticeable lag. These applications usually disable Nagle’s with an
interface called the TCP_NODELAY  option.

---PAGE 22---
3. The algorithm was originally developed at a time when computer
networks supported much less bandwidth than they do today. It saved
bandwidth and made a lot of sense at the time, however, the algorithm is
much less frequently used today.
4. The algorithm also works poorly with delayed ACKS, a TCP feature that
is used now. With both algorithms enabled, applications experience a
consistent delay because Nagle’s algorithm doesn’t send data until an ACK
is received and delayed ACKs feature doesn’t send an ACK until after a
certain delay.
Quick Quiz! #
1
Consider the following scenario:
The last segment received by a TCP entity had an ACK value
of 10.
The MSS value is 536.
There are 50 bytes in the buffer waiting for transmission.
The window size is 500.
The application sends a 500 byte message.
All the data sent so far has been acknowledged.
Will the data be buffered or sent on if Nagle’s was active?
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 3
A) It will be buffered
B) One TCP segment with all the buffered data will be sent
C) One MSS sized segment will be sent
For now, that’s all on Nagle’s. Let’s move on to TCP window-scaling
mechanisms.
TCP Window Scaling
In this lesson, we'll discuss TCP window scaling!
We'll cover the following
• Problem: Small Windows Result in Inef}cient Use of Bandwidth
• Round Trip Time vs. Bandwidth vs. Throughput
• Transmission and Propagation Delays: Example
• Solution: Larger Windows
• Scaling Factor
• Deciding a Scaling Factor
• Improvement
• Quick Quiz!
Problem: Small Windows Result in Inef}cient Use
of Bandwidth #
From a performance point of view, one of the main limitations of the original
TCP design is that the 16-bit window size header limits the TCP receive
window size to 2
 bytes i.e., 65, 535 bytes. That means the sender can send at
most 65, 535 bytes before it has to wait for an acknowledgment.
Round Trip Time vs. Bandwidth vs. Throughput #
Round Trip Time is the amount of time it takes to send a packet and
receive its acknowledgment.
Bandwidth is the rate at which the network can transport the bits.
Throughput is the amount of data that is actually transferred from one
end-system to another.
So what if the round trip time is short enough to accommodate sending more
data without having to wait for acknowledgments? The table below shows the
rough maximum throughput that can be achieved by a TCP connection with a
6
i d
f
i
f h
i
d
i
i
16
64 KBytes window as a function of the connection’s round-trip-time:
RTT
Maximum Throughput
1 msec
524 Mbps
10 msec
52.4 Mbps
100 msec
5.24 Mbps
500 msec
1.05 Mbps
This limitation was not a severe problem when TCP was designed, because at
the time the available bandwidth was 56 kbps at best. However, in today’s
networks where the bandwidth can be in order gigabytes, this limitation is not
acceptable.
Transmission and Propagation Delays: Example #
Consider a 1.544 Mbps link from one end host to another over a satellite
link that is 36000 km above the surface of the earth.
It takes 
 = 480 ms to get to the end host and then for the
acknowledgement to return (ignoring the transmission time of the ack).
This is the total distance to be covered by two segments divided by the
speed of light.
In the same amount of time, the sender could put 
 = 741120
bits = 92640 bytes = 90.5 kB on the network.
Now, even if the sliding window is at its maximum of 64 kB, the sender
will only transmit 64 kB and then wait, sitting idle until an
acknowledgement is received from the other side.
That is a network utilization of 
 = 70.71%. If we factor in the
overheads of headers from various layers, the utilization drops further.
Note that we don’t use satellite links much these days, but effectively,
whenever the product of bandwidth and delay is high which is common with
3×108
2×72000×1000
1000
480×1544000
64
90.5

---PAGE 23---
whenever the product of bandwidth and delay is high, which is common with
today’s high speed networks, we face the same problem. So, if the delay is
small, but the bandwidth is high, the sender can still put out a lot of bytes
really quickly on the wire and still have to wait for an ACK sitting idle.
Solution: Larger Windows #
To solve this problem, a backward-compatible extension that allows TCP to
use larger receive windows was proposed in RFC 1323.
Basic idea: instead of storing the size of the sending window and receiving
window as 16-bit integers in the TCB, we keep the 16-bit window size, but
introduce a multiplicative scaling factor.
Scaling Factor #
As the TCP segment header only contains 16 bits to place the window field, it
is impossible to copy the size of the sending window in each sent TCP
segment. Instead, the header contains:
sending window << S
where S is the scaling factor (0≤S≤14) negotiated during connection
establishment and is specified in the header options field. ‘<<’ is the bitwise
shift operator. This operation pads zeros at the right and discards the bits on
the left essentially multiplying by 2 for each shift.
Deciding a Scaling Factor #
The client adds its proposed scaling factor as a TCP option in the SYN segment.
If the server supports scaling windows, it sends the scaling factor in the
SYN+ACK segment when advertising its own receive window. The local and
remote scaling factors are included in the TCB. If the server does not support
scaling windows, it ignores the received option and no scaling is applied. So
scaling only applies when both parties support it.
Note that the protection mechanism of not maintaining state from the SYN
packet via SYN cookies has the disadvantage that the server wouldn’t
remember the proposed scaling factor.
Improvement #
p
By using the window scaling extensions defined in RFC 1323, TCP
implementations can use a receive buffer of up to 1 GByte. With such a
receive buffer, the maximum throughput that can be achieved by a single TCP
entity is delineated in the following table:
RTT
Maximum Throughput
1 msec
8590 Gbps
10 msec
859 Gbps
100 msec
86 Gbps
500 msec
17 Gbps
These throughputs are acceptable in today’s networks as there are already
servers with 10 Gbps interfaces.
Quick Quiz! #
1
Given the window scaling factor of 6 and window size of 3125,
how many bytes can the sender send without waiting for an
acknowledgement?
A) 100000
B) 200000
C) 2000000
COMPLETED 0%
1 of 2
Did you know that you can measure the round trip time on your network?
Yes, it’s true. Let’s see how in the next lesson.
Exercise: Measuring RTT with Ping
We'll cover the following
• Round-trip-time
• Pinging Google
• Dissecting The Output
Round-trip-time #
Just to recap the last lesson, the Round Trip Time of a connection is the
amount of time it takes to send a packet and receive its acknowledgment.
The ping  command can be used to measure the round-trip-time to send and
receive packets from a remote host. We’re just pinging google from here
because the location of the server that actually runs these commands from
our website may change over time. However, if you try this locally, chose a
remote destination which is far from your current location, e.g., a small web
server in a distant country.
Checkout ping’s manpage for more details!
Pinging Google #
Terminal
Click to Connect...

---PAGE 24---
Dissecting The Output #
Round trip time
Size of the
packet
IP address of
domain that
was looked up
Sequence
number and
TTL of the
packet
Note that the Time To Live (TTL) is the number of routers a packet can hop.
So a ttl of 53 means it can jump 53 more ‘hops’ before being discarded. Each
router or intermediary forwarding device decreases the TTL by one. This was
a rather simplified definition of the term. We will study it in detail in the next
chapter.
Now that we know some quirks and alterations added to optimize TCP over
time, let’s get into TCP congestion control algorithms!